Journal  of 
Katherine  Mansfield 


The  Works  of 
Katherine 
Man  s  f  i  eld 

Bliss 

The  Garden  Party 

The  Doves'  Nest 

The  Little  Girl 

Poems 

In  a  German  Pension 


IQI4 


/ 


"\ 


Journal  of 
Katherine 
Mansfield 


Edited  by 

J.  Middleton  Murry 


Alfred  -A-  Knopf 
N  e  w  Y  o  r  k  •  i  g  2  8 


~"*~\w 


Copyright  1927 
by  Alfred  A.  Knopf,  Inc. 


Manufactured  in  the  United  States 
of  America 


Published  September,  IQ27 

Second  Printing  October,  1927 

Third  Printing  November,  192J 

Fourth  Printing  November,  192J 

Fifth  Printing  January,  1928 

Sixth  Printing  July,  1928 


Illustrations 

1914  FRONTISPIECE 

1908  viii 

London,  IQ13  xvi 

1913  14 

1914  18 

"Chummie,"   October  191$  34 

Garsington,  1916  66 

1917  72 

Paris,  April  1918  80 

Mentone,  April  1920  152 

Mentone,  1921  178 

Montana,  1921  196 

"Grandma"  224 


Introduction 

Katherine  Mansfield  (Katherine  Middleton 
Murry,  nee  Kathleen  Beauchamp)  was  born  in  Well- 
ington, New  Zealand,  on  October  14,  1888.  She  was 
the  third  daughter  of  a  family  of  five.  The  Beauchamps 
had  been  in  Australia  and  New  Zealand  for  three  gen- 
erations. The  greater  part  of  her  early  childhood  was 
spent  in  a  small  township  called  Karori,  a  few  miles 
from  Wellington,  where  the  village  school  was  the  only 
school,  and  where  she  shared  what  education  there 
was  with  the  milk  boy  and  the  washerwoman's  daugh- 
ters (see  The  Doll's  House).  She  has  left  it  on  record 
that  she  had  her  first  story  accepted  at  the  age  of  nine 
—  I  remember  her  saying  that  it  appeared  in  a  maga- 
zine called  The  Lone  Hand  —  and  that,  at  the  same 
age,  she  gained  the  first  prize  for  English  composi- 
tion at  the  village  school,  the  subject  being  "A  Sea 
Voyage." 

At  the  age  of  thirteen  she  was  sent  to  be  educated 
in  England,  at  Queen's  College,  Harley  Street,  where 
she  remained  till  eighteen.  There  she  edited  the  col- 
lege magazine.  Like  other  young  people  of  her  genera- 
tion, she  found  the  beginning  of  intellectual  freedom 
through  an  admiration  of  Oscar  Wilde  and  the  English 
"  decadents,"  but,  at  this  time,  her  main  interests 

=  vii  = 


Introduction 


shifted  over  from  literature  to  music.  She  became  a 
devotee  of  the  violoncello,  and  a  fine  executant. 

She  returned  to  New  Zealand  much  against  her  will, 
and  spent  the  next  two  years  of  her  life  in  fairly  con- 
stant rebellion  against  what  she  then  considered  the 
narrowness  and  provincialism  of  a  remote  colonial 
city.  Inevitably,  London  appeared  to  her  as  the  living 
centre  of  all  artistic  and  intellectual  life.  A  family  of 
musicians  in  Wellington,  whom  she  knew  intimately, 
and  who  had  been  a  kind  of  oasis  for  her  in  what 
seemed  to  her  an  intellectual  desert,  left  New  Zealand 
for  London.  At  their  departure  she  was  in  despair. 
She  went  on  a  rough  camping  expedition  through  the 
New  Zealand  bush.  On  her  return  she  persuaded  her 
parents  to  allow  her  to  return  to  London  on  a  small 
allowance. 

Shortly  afterwards,  she  finally  abandoned  music  for 
literature.  She  submitted  manuscripts  to  editors  in 
vain,  and,  in  her  effort  to  make  ends  meet,  she  had 
varied  and  exacting  experiences  in  minor  parts  in  trav- 
elling opera  companies  and  the  like,  until  the  quality 
of  her  writing  was  recognised  by  the  editor  of  The  New 
Age.  From  1909  to  191 1  she  was  a  fairly  constant  con- 
tributor to  that  paper.  A  series  of  stories  she  wrote 
for  The  New  Age,  based  on  her  experiences  while  con- 
valescent in  Germany  after  an  illness,  was  collected 
and  published  in  191 1,  under  the  title  In  a  German 
Pension.  This  book  was  immediately  recognised.  It 
passed  quickly  into  three  editions,  when  its  sale  was 
disastrously  interrupted  by  the  sudden  bankruptcy  of 

=  viii  = 


o 


Introduction 


her  publisher.  For  In  a  German  Pension  she  received 
£  15  in  advance  of  royalties,  of  which,  of  course,  there 
were  none. 

In  December  191 1  I  met  her  at  the  house  of  the  late 
W.  L.  George,  the  novelist.  I  was,  at  that  time,  an 
Oxford  undergraduate,  connected  with  a  youthful  lit- 
erary magazine  called  Rhythm.  Katherine  Mansfield 
began  to  write  stories  regularly  for  this.  Her  first  story, 
"  The  Woman  at  the  Store,"  caused  a  minor  sensation. 
Rhythm,  which  became  for  its  last  three  numbers  The 
Blue  Review,  lasted  for  about  eighteen  months,  dur- 
ing most  of  which  Katherine  Mansfield  and  I  edited 
it  together.  Most  of  the  stories  she  contributed  to  it, 
sometimes  two  a  month,  have  been  republished  in 
Something  Childish,  and  other  Stories. 

When  The  Blue  Review  died,  in  July  191 3,  Katherine 
Mansfield  had  no  place  to  write  in.  The  beautiful  story, 
Something  Childish  but  very  Natural,  which  she  wrote 
in  Paris  in  December  191 3,  was  refused  by  every  editor 
to  whom  she  submitted  it.  No  home  could  be  found  for 
any  one  of  her  stories  till  the  winter  of  1915,  when  she 
and  D.  H.  Lawrence  and  I  produced  three  numbers 
of  a  little  magazine  called  The  Signature,  written 
wholly  by  ourselves.  The  Signature  died  within  two 
months,  and  again  Katherine  Mansfield  had  nowhere 
to  write,  until  I  became  editor  of  The  Athen&um  in 
1919.  In  the  four  years  between  191 5  and  1919,  three 
stories  of  hers  were  published  by  English  periodicals, 
all  in  1918.  "  Bliss  "  in  The  English  Review,  and 
"  Pictures "  and  "  The  Man  Without  a  Tempera- 

=  ix  = 


Introduction 


merit  "  in  Art  and  Letters.  In  191 7,  however,  Prelude 
had  been  published  as  a  little  blue-paper  book  by  the 
Hogarth  Press,  and  ]e  ne  parle  pas  frangais  printed 
for  private  circulation  by  my  brother  and  myself. 

Prelude  marks  the  beginning  of  the  final  phase  in 
Katherine  Mansfield's  development.  The  war  had 
come  as  a  profound  spiritual  shock  to  her,  as  it  did  to 
many  less  gifted  writers  of  her  generation.  For  a  long 
period  the  chaos  into  which  her  thoughts  and  ideals 
and  purposes  had  been  flung  remained  unresolved. 
Then  slowly  her  mind  began  to  turn  back  towards  her 
early  childhood  as  a  life  which  had  existed  apart  from, 
and  uncontaminated  by,  the  mechanical  civilisation 
which  had  produced  the  war.  The  crucial  moment  was 
when,  in  191 5,  her  dearly  loved  younger  brother  ar- 
rived in  England  to  serve  as  an  officer.  Her  meeting 
with  him  formed,  as  it  were,  a  point  round  which  her 
changed  attitude  could  crystallise.  They  talked  over 
their  early  childhood  for  hours  on  end,  and  Katherine 
Mansfield  resolved  to  dedicate  herself  to  recreating  life 
as  she  had  lived  and  felt  it  in  New  Zealand.  Her  broth- 
er's death  a  month  later  confirmed  her  in  her  purpose, 
and  shortly  afterwards  she  left  England  for  Bandol  in 
the  south  of  France,  and  began  to  work  on  a  long  story 
of  her  childhood  days  called  The  Aloe,  which  was  pub- 
lished in  a  different  and  shortened  form  as  Prelude. 

On  its  appearance  as  a  blue-paper  volume  Prelude 
was  completely  ignored.  Most  of  the  newspapers  to 
which  it  was  sent  did  not  review  it  at  all.  Those  which 
did  saw  nothing  particular  in  it.  But  Katherine  Mans- 

=  x  = 


Introduction 


field  had  her  moment  of  triumph  when  she  heard  that 
the  local  printer  who  set  up  the  book  had  exclaimed 
on  reading  the  MS.,  "  My !  but  these  kids  are  real!  " 
It  was  characteristic  of  her  that  she  preferred  the 
praise  of  simple,  "  unliterary  "  people  to  that  of  the 
cultured  and  the  critics;  and  this  characteristic  be- 
came still  more  marked  later  on,  when,  after  the  publi- 
cation of  "  Bliss,"  she  began  to  receive  many  letters 
from  simple  people  who  loved  her  work,  and,  above 
all,  the  child  Kezia  who  appeared  in  it.  She  felt  she  had 
a  responsibility  to  these  people.  To  them  she  must  tell 
the  truth,  and  nothing  but  the  truth.  This  preoccupa- 
tion with  truth,  in  what  she  told  and  in  herself  to  be 
worthy  to  tell  it,  became  the  devouring  passion  of  her 
last  years.  She  turned  away  from  modern  literature: 
so  little  of  contemporary  work  seemed  to  her  to  be 
"true."  "The  writers  are  not  humble,"  she  used  to 
say;  they  were  not  serving  the  great  purpose  which 
literature  exists  to  serve. 

In  the  meantime  Prelude  was  hardly  more  than  a 
succes  d'estime,  if  indeed  it  was  that.  Not  until  it  ap- 
peared as  the  first  story  in  "  Bliss  "  was  its  unique  and 
profoundly  original  quality  truly  appreciated. 

But  in  December  191 7,  just  after  she  had  finished 
revising  the  MS.  of  Prelude  for  the  printer,  Katherine 
Mansfield  had  a  serious  attack  of  pleurisy.  The  gloom 
and  depression  and  sunlessness  of  a  London  now  com- 
pletely under  the  shadow  of  the  war  had  a  profound 
effect  on  one  whose  childhood  had  been  spent  in  a 
gentler  air.  She  pined  for  the  sun;  she  was  confident 

=  xi  = 


Introduction 


that  she  had  only  to  revisit  her  beloved  Bandol  in  the 
south  of  France  to  be  well  again.  Accordingly  she  left 
England  at  the  beginning  of  January  1918.  But  travel- 
ling conditions  in  France  in  the  last  year  of  the  war 
were  such  that  the  hardships  she  suffered  on  the  jour- 
ney (which  she  had  to  undertake  alone)  made  her  ill- 
ness worse,  and  to  her  dismay,  Bandol  itself  was  ut- 
terly changed ;  it  also  had  been  wasted  by  the  war.  No 
sooner  had  she  reached  the  place,  ill  and  alone,  than 
she  passionately  desired  to  return  to  England.  Tragic 
ill-fortune  dogged  her  in  her  efforts  to  return.  The  au- 
thorities delayed  for  weeks  before  granting  their  per- 
mission; and  on  the  very  day  she  arrived  in  Paris, 
weak  and  by  this  time  very  seriously  ill,  the  long-range 
bombardment  of  Paris  began,  and  all  civilian  traffic 
between  England  and  France  was  suspended.  The 
hardships  of  her  journey  in  France  turned  her  pleurisy 
into  consumption. 

She  went  to  Looe  in  Cornwall  for  the  summer  of 
191 8,  and  returned  to  a  new  house  in  Hampstead  for 
the  winter.  In  the  spring  of  1919 1  became  editor  of  The 
Athenceum,  and  she  began  to  write  weekly  criticisms 
of  novels  under  the  initials  K.M.,  which  then  began  to 
be  famous,  and  a  little  later  began  to  write  a  story  each 
month  for  the  paper.  Then,  for  the  first  time,  the  pub- 
lishers began  to  ask  her  to  collect  her  stories,  and  at 
the  beginning  of  1920  Bliss,  for  which  she  received  £  40 
in  advance,  appeared. 

Before  it  appeared,  she  had  been  driven  from  Eng- 
land once  more  by  her  illness.  She  spent  the  winter 

=  xii  = 


Introduction 


of  1919-1920  in  Ospedaletti  and  Mentone,  where  she 
learned  of  the  success  of  her  book.  She  returned  to 
Hampstead  for  the  summer,  and  in  September  left 
once  more  for  Mentone.  From  Mentone  she  went,  in 
May  192 1,  to  Montana  in  Switzerland. 

In  the  autumn  of  1921  she  completed  The  Garden 
Party,  and  Other  Stories,  which  was  published  in  the 
spring  of  1922,  while  she  was  in  Paris,  whither  she  had 
gone  for  a  special  treatment  in  February.  The  appear- 
ance of  The  Garden  Party  finally  established  her  as 
the  most  remarkable  short-story  writer  of  her  genera- 
tion in  England. 

But  now  in  1922  writing  had  become  for  her  an  al- 
most impossible  struggle,  not  only  against  disease,  but 
against  an  inward  conviction  that  some  work  of  inward 
purification  had  to  be  accomplished  before  she  could 
go  forward,  before  she  would  be  worthy  to  express  the 
complete  truth  which  in  her  imagination  she  appre- 
hended. The  Canary,  the  last  complete  story  she  wrote, 
was  completed  in  July  1922.  Shortly  after  this  she 
abandoned  writing  for  the  time  and  went  into  retire- 
ment at  Fontainebleau,  where  she  died  suddenly  and 
unexpectedly  on  the  night  of  January  9,  1923. 

It  is  difficult  for  me  to  attempt  a  critical  valuation 
of  Katherine  Mansfield's  work.  All  my  life  I  was  in- 
volved in  it.  I  believed  in  it,  published  it,  and  for  one 
brief  moment  even  printed  it  with  my  own  hands.  And 
now,  and  always,  it  is  and  will  be  impossible  for  me  to 
be  wholly  detached  from  it.  I  can  only  say  that  her 
work  seems  to  me  to  be  of  a  finer  and  purer  kind  than 

—  xiii  = 


Introduction 


that  of  her  contemporaries.  It  is  more  spontaneous, 
more  vivid,  more  delicate  and  more  beautiful.  Kath- 
erine  Mansfield  responded  more  completely  to  life 
than  any  writer  I  have  known,  and  the  effect  of  that 
more  complete  response  is  in  her  work. 

Her  affinities  are  rather  with  the  English  poets  than 
the  English  prose-writers.  There  is  no  English  prose- 
writer  to  whom  she  can  be  related.1  The  revolution 
which  she  made  in  the  art  of  short  story  in  England 
was  altogether  personal.  Many  writers  have  attempted 
to  carry  on  her  work ;  not  one  has  come  within  a  meas- 
urable distance  of  success.  Her  secret  died  with  her. 
And  of  the  many  critics  who  have  tried  to  define  the 
quality  in  her  work  which  makes  it  so  inimitable,  every 
one  has  been  compelled  to  give  up  the  attempt  in  des- 
pair. It  is  noticeable,  however,  that  the  most  whole- 
hearted admiration  her  work  has  received  comes  pre- 
eminently from  the  most  distinguished  short-story 
writers  we  have  in  England  —  H.  G.  Wells,  John  Gals- 
worthy, Walter  de  la  Mare,  H.  M.  Tomlinson,  Stacy 
Aumonier,  Barry  Pain,  Ethel  Colburn  Mayne.  These 
practitioners  of  the  art,  with  one  voice,  salute  her  as 

1  There  is  a  certain  resemblance  between  Katherine  Mansfield's  stories 
and  those  of  Anton  Tchehov.  But  this  resemblance  is  often  exaggerated  by 
critics,  who  seem  to  believe  that  Katherine  Mansfield  learned  her  art  from 
Tchehov.  That  is  a  singularly  superficial  view  of  the  relation,  which  was 
one  of  kindred  temperaments.  In  fact,  Katherine  Mansfield's  technique  is 
very  different  from  Tchehov's.  She  admired  and  understood  Tchehov's  work 
as  few  English  writers  have  done;  she  had  a  deep  personal  affection  for  the 
man,  whom,  of  course,  she  never  knew.  But  her  method  was  wholly  her  own, 
and  her  development  would  have  been  precisely  the  same  had  Tchehov  never 
existed. 

=  xiv  = 


Introduction 

hors  concours,  though  they  find  it  as  difficult  as  any 
critic  to  say  wherein  her  superiority  consists.  And  per- 
haps a  more  remarkable  fact  is  that  her  stories  have 
met  with  an  unusual  popular  success.  For  all  her  art, 
perhaps  more  truly  because  her  art  was  of  a  peculiarly 
instinctive  kind,  Katherine  Mansfield's  stories  are 
read  and  loved  by  innumerable  simple  people,  who  find 
in  her  characters  a  living  reality  which  is  rare  in  the 
literature  they  read.  And  it  may  be  that  the  simplest 
criticism  of  her  work  is  the  truest ;  and  that  the  most 
adequate  judgment  upon  her  writing  is  that  of  the 
printer  whom  I  have  quoted:  "But  these  kids  are 
real!" 

It  is,  however,  impossible  for  me  who  knew  her  in- 
timately, who  (in  a  sense)  worked  with  her  during  the 
greater  part  of  her  career  as  a  writer,  who  copied  and 
punctuated  and  criticised  her  stories  as  they  were  writ- 
ten, to  be  silent  on  one  element  in  her  nature  which, 
it  seems  to  me,  was  essential  to  the  peculiar  quality 
of  her  work.  This  peculiar  quality  of  her  work  I  can 
only  describe  as  a  kind  of  purity.  It  is  as  though  the 
glass  through  which  she  looked  upon  life  were  crystal- 
clear.  And  this  quality  of  her  work  corresponds  to  a 
quality  in  her  life.  Katherine  Mansfield  was  natural 
and  spontaneous  as  was  no  other  human  being  I  have 
ever  met.  She  seemed  to  adjust  herself  to  life  as  a  flower 
adjusts  itself  to  the  earth  and  to  the  sun.  She  suffered 
greatly,  she  delighted  greatly :  but  her  suffering  and  her 
delight  were  never  partial,  they  filled  the  whole  of  her. 
She  was  utterly  generous,  utterly  courageous;  when 

=  xv  = 


Introduction 


she  gave  herself,  to  life,  to  love,  to  some  spirit  of  truth 
which  she  served,  she  gave  royally.  She  loved  life  — 
with  all  its  beauty  and  its  pain ;  she  accepted  life  com- 
pletely, and  she  had  the  right  to  accept  it,  for  she  had 
endured  in  herself  all  the  suffering  which  life  can  lavish 
upon  a  single  soul. 

The  brief  biographical  sketch  printed  above  was 
written  for  the  information  of  the  many  people  who 
have  asked  me  for  particulars  of  Katherine  Mans- 
field's life.  It  is  printed  here  to  serve  as  a  background 
to  the  Journal  and  the  two  volumes  of  letters  now  in 
preparation.  As  for  the  Journal  itself,  a  few  words  of 
introduction  are  necessary. 

At  various  times  in  her  life  Katherine  Mansfield 
entertained  the  plan  of  writing  for  publication  "  a 
kind  of  minute  note-book  "  (see  the  entry  of  January 
22,  1916).  Three  separate  attempts  to  carry  the  plan 
into  execution  can  be  traced  in  her  manuscripts,  and 
once  she  got  so  far  as  to  ask  me  to  arrange  with  a 
publisher  for  its  publication.  The  notes  for  this  "  note- 
book "  would  have  been  rewritten  from  entries  in  her 
Journal.  In  a  few  cases,  as  in  May  1919,  the  original 
entry  and  the  "  note  "  exist  side  by  side. 

The  remaining  material  of  which  the  Journal  is 
composed  is  of  various  kinds  —  brief  (and  sometimes 
difficult)  notes  for  stories,  fragments  of  diaries,  un- 
posted letters,  comments  and  confessions  scattered 
through  her  manuscripts.  To  these  I  have  added  a 
minimum  of  necessary  words  of  explanation. 

=  xvi  = 


Ox 


Introduction 


Save  for  a  single  entry  the  Journal  begins  in  1914. 
The  "  huge  complaining  diaries  "  of  which  Katherine 
Mansfield  speaks  (February  16,  1916)  were  all  de- 
stroyed. She  was  ruthless  with  her  own  past,  and  I  have 
little  doubt  that  what  has  survived  is  almost  wholly 
that  which,  for  some  reason  or  other,  she  wished  to 
survive. 

John  Middleton  Murry. 


Journal  of 
Katherine  Mansfield 


IpIO 

[K.M.  ruthlessly  destroyed  all  record  of  the  time  between  her 
return  from  New  Zealand  to  England  in  1909,  and  1914.  The 
following  fragment  is  all  that  remains  of  her  "  huge  complaining 
diaries"  (see  p.  45).  It  belongs  to  1910,  to  that  stay  in  Bavaria 
which  was  the  origin  of  her  first  book,  In  a  German  Pension.  A 
subsequent  allusion  to  her  misery  in  Bavaria  will  be  found  in 
her  Journal  of  December  1920.] 

June.  It  is  at  last  over,  this  wearisome  day,  and 
dusk  is  beginning  to  sift  in  among  the  branches  of  the 
drenched  chestnut  tree.  I  think  I  must  have  caught 
cold  in  my  beautiful  exultant  walk  yesterday,  for  to- 
day I  am  ill.  I  began  to  work  but  could  not.  Fancy 
wearing  two  pairs  of  stockings  and  two  coats  and  a 
hot-water  bottle  in  June,  and  shivering.  ...  I  think 
it  is  the  pain  that  makes  me  shiver  and  feel  dizzy.  To 
be  alone  all  day,  in  a  house  whose  every  sound  seems 
foreign  to  you,  and  to  feel  a  terrible  confusion  in  your 
body  which  affects  you  mentally,  suddenly  pictures 
for  you  detestable  incidents,  revolving  personalities, 
which  you  only  shake  off  to  find  recurring  again  as  the 
pain  seems  to  grow  worse  again.  Alas !  I  shall  not  walk 
with  bare  feet  in  wild  woods  again.  Not  until  I  have 
grown  accustomed  to  the  climate.  .  .  . 

The  only  adorable  thing  I  can  imagine  is  for  my 
Grandmother  to  put  me  to  bed  and  bring  me  a  bowl 


Journal   igio 

of  hot  bread  and  milk,  and  standing  with  her  hands 
folded,  the  left  thumb  over  the  right,  say  in  her  ador- 
able voice:  "There,  darling,  isn't  that  nice?"  Oh, 
what  a  miracle  of  happiness  that  would  be.  To  wake 
later  to  find  her  turning  down  the  bedclothes  to  see  if 
my  feet  were  cold,  and  wrapping  them  up  in  a  little 
pink  singlet,  softer  than  cat's  fur.  .  .  .  Alas ! 

Sunday  Morning.  Yet  another  Sunday.  ...  It  is  rain- 
ing again  to-day  —  just  a  steady  persistent  rain  that 
seems  to  drift  one  from  one  morning  to  the  other. 
When  I  had  finished  writing  I  went  down  to  supper, 
drank  a  little  soup,  and  the  old  Doctor  next  me  sud- 
denly said :  "  Please  go  to  bed  now"  and  I  went  like 
a  lamb  and  drank  some  hot  milk.  It  was  a  night  of 
agony.  When  I  felt  morning  was  at  last  come,  I  lighted 
a  candle,  looked  at  the  watch,  and  found  it  was  just  a 
quarter  to  twelve!  Now  I  know  what  it  is  to  fight  a 
drug.  Veronal  was  on  the  table  by  my  bed.  Oblivion  — 
deep  sleep  —  think  of  it !  But  I  didn't  take  any.  Now 
I  am  up  and  dressed.  .  .  . 


=  2  = 


igi4 

[In  February  1914,  when  the  following  entries  were  made, 
Katherine  Mansfield  and  I  were  living  in  Paris,  at  32  rue  de 
Tournon.  We  found  it  impossible  to  earn  enough  money,  and  I 
had  to  return  to  London  to  look  for  work.] 

"  A  calm,  irresistible  well-being  —  almost  mystic  in 
character,  and  yet  doubtless  connected  with  physical 
conditions  "  [Dorothy  Wordsworth's  Journal]. 

Writes  Dorothy : 

William  (P.G.)  is  very  well, 

And  gravely  blithe  —  you  know  his  way  — 

Talking  with  woodruff  and  harebell 

And  idling  all  the  summer  day 

As  he  can  well  afford  to  do. 

(P.G.  for  that  again.)  For  who 

Is  more  Divinely  Entitled  to? 

He  rises  and  breakfasts  sharp  at  seven, 

Then  pastes  some  fern-fronds  in  his  book, 

Until  his  milk  comes  at  eleven 

With  two  fresh  scones  baked  by  the  cook. 

And  then  he  paces  in  the  sun 

Until  we  dine  at  half  past  one. 

"  God  and  the  cook  are  very  good," 

Laughs  William,  relishing  his  food. 

(Sometimes  the  tears  rush  to  my  eyes: 

How  kind  he  is,  and  oh,  how  wise!) 

After,  he  sits  and  reads  to  me 

Until  at  four  we  take  our  tea. 

=  3  = 


Journal   1914 

My  dear,  you  hardly  would  believe 
That  William  could  so  sigh  and  grieve 
Over  a  simple,  childish  tale 
How  '  Mary  trod  upon  the  Snail,' 
Or  '  Little  Ernie  lost  his  Pail.' 
And  then  perhaps  a  good  half-mile 
He  walks  to  get  an  appetite 
For  supper,  which  we  take  at  night 
In  the  substantial  country  style. 
By  nine  he's  in  bed  and  fast  asleep, 
Not  snoring,  dear,  but  very  deep, 
Oh,  very  deep  asleep  indeed.  .  .  . 

And  so  on  ad  lib.  What  a  Pa  man ! 

I  am  going  to  read  Goethe.  Except  for  a  few  poems, 
I  know  nothing  of  his  well.  I  shall  read  "  Poetry  and 
Truth  "  immediately. 

"  When  all  is  done  human  life  is  at  its  greatest  and 
but  a  little  froward  child  to  be  played  with,  and  hu- 
moured a  little,  to  keep  it  quiet  until  it  falls  asleep,  and 
then  the  care  is  over  "  (Temple) . 

That's  the  sort  of  strain  —  not  for  what  it  says  and 
means,  but  for  the  '  lilt '  of  it  —  that  sets  me  writing. 

The  Child  in  my  Arms 

"  Will  you  touch  me  with  the  child  in  my  arms  ?  " 
is  no  mere  pleasantry.  Change  the  '  will '  into  '  can ' 
and  it's  tief,  sehr  tief!  I  was  thinking  just  now  .  .  . 
that  I  hardly  dare  give  rein  to  my  thoughts  of  J.  and 
my  longing  for  J.  And  I  thought :  if  I  had  a  child,  I 

=  4  = 


The   Child  in   my   Arms 


would  play  with  it  now  and  lose  myself  in  it  and  kiss 
it  and  make  it  laugh.  And  I'd  use  a  child  as  my  guard 
against  my  deepest  feeling. 

When  I  felt :  '  No,  I'll  think  no  more  of  this ;  it's 
intolerable  and  unbearable,'  I'd  dance  the  baby. 

That's  true,  I  think,  of  all,  all  women.  And  it  ac- 
counts for  the  curious  look  of  security  that  you  see  in 
young  mothers :  they  are  safe  from  any  ultimate  state 
of  feeling  because  of  the  child  in  their  arms.  And  it 
accounts  also  for  the  women  who  call  men  *  children/ 
Such  women  fill  themselves  with  their  men — gorge 
themselves  really  into  a  state  of  absolute  heartlessness. 
Watch  the  sly,  satisfied  smile  of  women  who  say, 
"  Men  are  nothing  but  babies !  " 

"  They  were  neither  of  them  quite  enough  in  love  to 
imagine  that  £350  a  year  would  supply  them  with 
all  the  comforts  of  life  "  (Jane  Austen's  "  Elinor  and 
Edward").  My  God!  say  I. 

I  went  to  J.'s  room  and  looked  through  the  window. 
It  was  evening,  with  little  light,  and  what  was  there 
was  very  soft  —  the  Freak  Hour  when  people  never 
seem  to  be  quite  in  focus.  I  watched  a  man  walking  up 
and  down  the  road  —  and  he  looked  like  a  fly  walk- 
ing up  a  wall  —  and  some  men  straining  up  with  a 
barrow  —  all  bottoms  and  feet.  In  the  house  opposite, 
at  a  ground-floor  window,  heavily  barred,  sat  a  little 
dark  girl  in  a  grey  shawl  reading  a  book.  Her  hair  was 
parted  down  the  middle:  she  had  a  small,  oval  face. 
She  was  perfectly  charming,  so  set  in  the  window  with 

=  5  = 


Journal   1914 


the  shining  white  of  the  book.  I  felt  a  sort  of  Spanish 
infatuation.  .  .  . 

It  is  as  though  God  opened  his  hand  and  let  you 
dance  on  it  a  little,  and  then  shut  it  up  tight  —  so  tight 
that  you  could  not  even  cry.  .  .  .  The  wind  is  terrible 
to-night.  I  am  very  tired  —  but  can't  go  to  bed.  I 
can't  sleep  or  eat.  Too  tired. 

"  It  was  the  touch  of  art  that  P.  was  suffering,  the 
inexorable  magic  touch  that  still  transforms  in  spite 
of  us;  that  never  hesitates  to  test  and  examine  the 
materials  it  has  to  transmute,  but  never  fails  to  trans- 
mute them." 

[By  the  end  of  February  1914  we  had  returned  to  London, 
with  very  little  but  the  clothes  we  stood  in.  For  a  few  weeks  we 
lived  in  a  furnished  flat  in  Beaufort  Mansions,  Chelsea.  From 
the  back  windows  one  had  a  view  of  a  timber-yard  and  a 
cemetery.] 

A  Dream 
March  6.  K.T.  and  her  sister  were  walking  down 
a  road  that  was  bounded  on  one  side  by  a  high  hill  and 
had  on  the  other  a  deep  ravine.  So  deep  was  the  ravine 
that  the  cliffs  at  its  base  shone  like  points  of  teeth, 
sharp  and  tiny.  Her  sister  was  very  frightened  and 
clung  to  her  arm,  trembling  and  crying.  So  K.T.  hid 
her  terror  and  said,  "  It  is  all  right.  It  is  perfectly  all 
right."  She  had  a  little  black  fur  muff  slipped  over  one 
hand. 

Suddenly  there  came  driving  towards  them  a  chariot 

=  6  - 


A  Dream 


like  the  one  in  her  Latin  book,  drawn  by  six  stumpy 
horses  and  driven  by  a  charioteer  in  a  skull  cap.  They 
came  at  a  furious  gallop,  but  the  charioteer  was  calm ; 
a  quiet  evil  smile  dyed  his  lips. 

"Oh,  K.T.!  Oh,  K.T.!  I'm  frightened,"  sobbed  her 
sister. 

"  It's  quite  all  right.  It's  perfectly  all  right,"  scolded 
K.T. 

But  as  she  watched  the  chariot  a  strange  thing  took 
place.  Though  the  horses  maintained  their  tearing  gal- 
lop, they  were  not  coming  towards  her  and  her  sister, 
but  were  galloping  backwards,  while  the  charioteer 
smiled  as  though  with  deep  satisfaction.  K.T.  put  her 
little  black  muff  over  her  sister's  face.  "  They're  gone. 
They're  quite  gone."  But  now  the  deafening  clatter 
came  from  behind  them  like  the  sound  of  an  army  of 
horsemen  in  clashing  armour.  Louder  and  louder  and 
nearer  and  nearer  came  the  noise.  "  Oh,  K.T. !  Oh, 
K.T. ! "  moaned  her  sister  and  K.T.  shut  her  lips,  only 
pressing  her  sister's  arm.  The  noise  was  upon  them  — 
in  a  moment  —  now. 

And  nothing  passed  but  a  black  horse  as  tall  as  a 
house  with  a  dark  serene  rider  in  a  wide  hat  gliding 
past  them  like  a  ship  through  the  dark  water,  and  glid- 
ing importantly  down  the  hill.  The  sight  was  so  fearful 
that  K.T.  knew  she  dreamed.  "  I  must  wake  up  at 
once."  And  she  made  every  effort  to  shut  her  eyes  and 
shake  away  the  scene,  but  it  would  not  go.  She  tried 
to  call  and  she  felt  her  lips  open,  but  no  sound  would 
come.  She  shouted  and  screamed  without  a  sound  until 


Journal   1914 

at  last  she  felt  her  bed  and  lifted  her  head  into  the 
burning  dark  of  the  bedroom. 

The  view  from  my  window  this  morning  is  so  tre- 
mendously exciting.  A  high  wind  is  blowing  and  the 
glass  is  dashed  with  rain.  In  the  timber-yard  beside  the 
cemetery  there  are  large  pools  of  water  and  smoke 
blows  from  .  .  . 

March  19.  Dreamed  about  New  Zealand.  Very  de- 
lightful. 

March  20.  Dreamed  about  N.Z.  again  —  one  of  the 
painful  dreams  when  I'm  there  and  hazy  about  my  re- 
turn ticket. 

March  21.  Travelled  with  two  brown  women.  One  had 
a  basket  of  chickweed  on  her  arm,  the  other  a  basket 
of  daffodils.  They  both  carried  babies  bound,  some- 
how, to  them  with  a  torn  shawl.  Neat  spare  women 
with  combed  and  braided  hair.  They  slung  talk  at  each 
other  across  the  bus.  Then  one  woman  took  a  piece 
of  bread  from  her  sagging  pocket  and  gave  it  to  the 
baby,  the  other  opened  her  bodice  and  put  the  child  to 
her  breast.  They  sat  and  rocked  their  knees  and  darted 
their  quick  eyes  over  the  bus  load.  Busy  and  indifferent 
they  looked. 

March  22.  Went  to  the  Albert  Hall  with  B.C.  A  bad, 
dull  concert.  But  I  thought  all  the  while  that  I'd  rather 
be  with  musical  people  than  any  others,  and  that 


New  Zealand  M emorie s 


they're  mine,  really.  A  violinist  (miles  away)  bent  his 
head  and  his  hair  grew  like  G.'s :  that  made  me  think 
so,  I  suppose.  I  ought  to  be  able  to  write  about  them 
wonderfully. 

March  23.  When  I  get  by  myself,  I  am  always  more  or 
less  actively  miserable.  If  it  were  not  for  J.  I  should 
live  quite  alone.  It's  raining ;  I  have  a  cold  and  my  fire 
has  gone  out.  Sparrows  outside  are  cheeping  like  chick- 
ens. Oh  heavens !  what  a  different  scene  the  sound  re- 
calls! The  warm  sun,  and  the  tiny  yellow  balls,  so 
dainty,  treading  down  the  grass  blades,  and  Sheehan 
giving  me  the  smallest  chick  wrapped  in  a  flannel  to 
carry  to  the  kitchen  fire.  [Sheehan  was  the  original  of 
Pat  in  Prelude.] 

March  24.  Mother's  birthday.  I  wrote  at  2  o'clock  and 
got  up  and  sat  on  the  box  of  the  window  thinking  of 
her.  I  would  love  to  see  her  again  and  the  little  frown 
between  her  brows,  and  to  hear  her  voice.  But  I  don't 
think  I  will.  My  memory  of  her  is  so  complete  that  I 
don't  think  it  will  be  disturbed.  [It  was  not ;  Katherine 
Mansfield  did  not  see  her  mother  again.] 

The  P.'s  dined  with  us  last  night.  It  was  dull.  They 
are  worthy  and  pleasant,  but  Mrs.  P.  is  a  weight,  and 
P,  makes  me  feel  old.  He  only  likes  me  because  of 
what  I  used  to  be  like,  and  he  thinks  the  '  normal '  me 
abnormally  quiet  and  a  bit  lifeless.  I  don't  want  to 
see  them  again.  Thank  God !  there's  a  sprinkle  of  sun 
to-day. 

-  9  = 


Journal   1914 


The  river  to-night  was  low  and  the  little  walls  and 
towers  and  chimneys  on  the  opposite  bank  black 
against  the  night.  I  keep  thinking  of  Paris  and  money. 
I  am  getting  all  my  spring  out  of  the  sunsets. 

March  25.  L.M.  and  I  travelled  miles  to-day.  We  sat 
in  a  bus  talking,  and  now  and  again  when  I  looked  up, 
I  kept  seeing  the  squares  with  their  butterfly  leaves 
just  ready  to  fly.  We  met  near  the  old  haunts  —  Queen 
Anne  Street  —  and  walked  in  one  of  the  little  lanes 
and  short  cuts  that  we  know  so  well  —  side  by  side, 
talking.  "  Let  me  tie  your  veil,"  and  I  stop ;  she  ties 
it  and  we  walk  on  again.  In  the  Persian  shop  she 
leaned  against  a  red  and  black  silk  curtain.  She  was 
very  pale,  and  her  black  hat  looked  enormous,  and 
she  kept  wanting  to  buy  me  "  these  things  —  feel  how 
soft  they  are,"  and  smiling  and  speaking  just  above 
her  breath  for  tiredness. 

March  26.  New  Moon,  6h.  9m.  p.m.  (I  didn't  see  it, 
though).  L.M.  and  I  took  the  tram  to  Clapham.  She 
left  at  about  9  p.m.  having  dressed  me.  When  I  leave 
her  hands  I  feel  hung  with  wreaths.  A  silly,  unreal 
evening  at  Miss  R.'s.  Pretty  rooms  and  pretty  people, 
pretty  coffee,  and  cigarettes  out  of  a  silver  tankard.  A 
sort  of  sham  Meredith  atmosphere  lurking.  A.R.  has 
a  pert,  nice  face  —  that  was  all.  I  was  wretched.  I  have 
nothing  to  say  to  l  charming  '  women.  I  feel  like  a  cat 
among  tigers.  The  ladies,  left  to  themselves,  talked 

=  10  = 


'Charming*    Women 


ghosts  and  child-beds.  I  am  wretchedly  unhappy 
among  everybody  —  and  the  silence  .  .  . 

March  27.  I  am  writing  for  L.M.  to  come.  She's  very 
late.  Everything  is  in  a  state  of  suspense  —  even  birds 
and  chimneys.  Frightened  in  'private. 

At  the  last  moment  L.M.  never  said  Good-bye  at 
all  but  took  the  fiddle  and  ran.  I  walked  away  down 
some  narrow  streets ;  large  drops  of  rain  fell.  I  passed 
some  packing  warehouses,  and  the  delicious  smell  of 
fresh  wood  and  straw  reminded  me  of  Wellington.  I 
could  almost  fancy  a  sawmill.  In  the  evening  the  C.'s, 
and  the  little  parrot  swinging  on  a  wire. 

March  28.  Put  my  clothes  in  order.  The  crocuses  in 
Battersea  reminded  me  of  autumn  in  Bavaria.  The 
ground  is  wet,  and  it  looks  as  though  winter  were  go- 
ing—  the  grass  long  and  green  among  the  trampled 
flowers.  Birds  are  far  more  savage-looking  than  the 
wildest  beasts.  Thinking  of  a  forest  of  wild  birds  —  or 
if  the  birds  '  turned '  even  here.  I  want  to  get  alone. 
The  magnolia  conspicua  is  in  bud. 

March  29. 1  am  going  to  start  a  play  to-day. 

March  30.  "  I  am  afraid  you  are  too  psychological,  Mr. 
Temple."  Then  I  went  off  and  bought  the  bacon. 

March  31.  A  splendid  fine  morning,  but  as  I  know  I 
have  to  go  out  and  change  the  cheque  and  pay  the 
bills,  I  can  do  nothing  and  I  feel  wretched.  Life  is  a 

=  11  = 


Journal   1914 


hateful  business,  there's  no  denying  it.  When  G.  and 
J.  were  talking  in  the  Park  of  physical  well-being  and 
of  how  they  could  still  look  forward  to  *  parties,'  I 
nearly  groaned.  And  I  am  sure  J.  could  get  a  great 
deal  of  pleasure  out  of  pleasant  society.  I  couldn't. 
I've  done  with  it,  and  can't  combat  it  at  all  now.  I  had 
so  much  rather  lean  idly  over  the  bridge  and  watch  the 
boats  and  the  free,  unfamiliar  people  and  feel  the  wind 
blow.  No,  I  hate  society.  The  idea  of  the  play  seems 
perfect  tripe  to-day. 

April  1.  Spent  another  frightful  day.  Nothing  helps 
or  could  help  me  except  a  person  who  could  guess. 
Went  for  a  walk  and  had  some  vague  comfort  given 
by  some  children  and  the  noise  of  the  water  like  rising 
waves. 

April  2.  I  have  begun  to  sleep  badly  again  and  I've 
decided  to  tear  up  everything  that  I've  written  and 
start  again.  I'm  sure  that  is  best.  This  misery  persists, 
and  I  am  so  crushed  under  it.  If  I  could  write  with  my 
old  fluency  for  one  day,  the  spell  would  be  broken.  It's 
the  continual  effort  —  the  slow  building-up  of  my  idea 
and  then,  before  my  eyes  and  out  of  my  power,  its 
slow  dissolving. 

April  3.  Went  for  a  walk  by  the  river  this  evening  and 
watched  the  boats.  Two  had  red  sails  and  one  had 
white.  The  trees  are  budding  almost  before  one's  eyes 
in  this  warm  weather  —  big  white  buds  like  birds  on 

=  12  = 


A  Moral   Victory 


the  chestnut  trees,  and  round  trees  just  sprinkled  with 
green.  The  world  is  exceedingly  lovely.  My  letter  to 
L.M.  was  a  great  effort.  She  seemed  somehow  *  out  of 
the  running.'  But  then  so  does  everybody.  I  feel  a  real 
horror  of  people  closing  over  me.  I  could  not  bear 
them.  I  wish  I  lived  on  a  barge,  with  J.  for  a  husband 
and  a  little  boy  for  a  son. 

April  4.  Won  a  moral  victory  this  morning,  to  my  great 
relief.  Went  out  to  spend  2s.  nd.  and  left  it  unspent. 
But  I  have  never  known  a  more  hideous  day.  Terribly 
lonely.  Nothing  that  isn't  satirical  is  really  true  for  me 
to  write  just  now.  If  I  try  to  find  things  lovely,  I  turn 
pretty-pretty.  And  at  the  same  time  I  am  so  frightened 
of  writing  mockery  for  satire  that  my  pen  hovers  and 
won't  settle.  Dined  with  C.'s  and  D.  Afterward  to  Cafe 
Royal.  The  sheep  were  bleating  and  we  set  up  a  feeble 
counterpart.  Saw  a  fight.  The  woman  with  her  back  to 
me  —  her  arms  crooked  sharp  at  the  elbows,  her  head 
thrust  out,  like  a  big  bird. 

April  5.  No  bird  sits  a  tree  more  proudly  than  a  pigeon. 
It  looks  at  though  placed  there  by  the  Lord.  The  sky 
was  silky  blue  and  white,  and  the  sun  shone  through 
the  little  leaves.  But  the  children,  pinched  and  crooked, 
made  me  feel  a  bit  out  of  love  with  God. 

April  6. 1  went  out  with  J.  to  find  a  shop ;  but  instead 
we  came  to  Swan  Walk  and  passed  and  repassed  and 
remarked  the  delightful  houses,  white  with  flowering 

=  13  = 


Journal   1014 

pear-trees  in  the  gardens  and  green  railings  and  fine 
carved  gates.  I  want  a  little  house  very  much.  My 
mind  is  full  of  embroidery,  but  there  isn't  any  material 
to  hold  it  together  or  make  it  strong.  A  silly  state !  L.M. 
seems  to  be  simply  fading  away.  I  can  barely  remem- 
ber her  objectively:  subjectively  she  is  just  the  same. 

April  7.  The  heavens  opened  for  the  sunset  to-night. 
When  I  had  thought  the  day  folded  and  sealed,  came 
a  burst  of  heavenly  bright  petals.  ...  I  sat  behind 
the  window,  pricked  with  rain,  and  looked  until  that 
hard  thing  in  my  breast  melted  and  broke  into  the 
smallest  fountain,  murmuring  as  aforetime,  and  I 
drank  the  sky  and  the  whisper.  Now  who  is  to  decide 
between  "  Let  it  be  "  and  "  Force  it  "?  J.  believes  in 
the  whip :  he  says  his  steed  has  plenty  of  strength,  but 
it  is  idle  and  shies  at  such  a  journey  in  prospect.  I  feel, 
if  mine  does  not  gallop  and  dance  at  free  will,  I  am  not 
riding  at  all,  but  just  swinging  from  its  tail.  For  ex- 
ample, to-day.  .  .  .  To-night  he's  all  sparks. 

May.  To-day  is  Sunday.  It  is  raining  a  little,  and  the 
birds  are  cheeping.  There's  a  smell  of  food  and  a  noise 
of  chopping  cabbage. 

Oh,  if  only  I  could  make  a  celebration  and  do  a  bit 
of  writing.  I  long  and  long  to  write,  and  the  words 
just  won't  come.  It's  a  queer  business.  Yet,  when  I 
read  people  like  Gorky,  for  instance,  I  realise  how 
streets  ahead  of  them  I  be.  .  .  . 

=  14  = 


IQI3 


T  ur  geniev 


July.  .  .  .  Then  I  put  my  hand  over  it  and  felt  for  a 
latch,  and  then  through  the  bars.  I  suppose  one  isn't 
expected  to  vault  over  it,  I  thought,  —  or  to  ride  a 
bicycle  up  this  side  and  dive  into  a  fountain  of  real 
water  on  the  other.  .  .  . 

To  Beauty.  Why  should  you  come  to-night  when 
it  is  so  cold  and  grey  and  when  the  clouds  are  heavy 
and  the  bees  troubled  in  their  swinging? 

August  17.  I  simply  cannot  believe  that  there  was  a 
time  when  I  cared  about  Turgeniev.  Such  a  poseur! 
Such  a  hypocrite!  It's  true  he  was  wonderfully  tal- 
ented but  I  keep  thinking  what  a  good  (cinema 
play?)  On  the  Eve  would  make. 

August  30.  We  go  to  Cornwall  to-morrow,  I  suppose. 
I've  re-read  my  diary.  Tell  me,  Is  there  a  God?  I'm 
old  to-night.  Ah,  I  wish  I  had  someone  to  love  me, 
comfort  me  and  stop  me  thinking. 

[After  two  changes  of  rooms  in  Chelsea,  and  a  fortnight  in  a 
furnished  cottage  at  Merryn  in  Cornwall,  we  took  in  September 
1914  an  ugly  cottage  at  The  Lee,  near  Missenden  in  Bucking- 
hamshire, where  the  following  entries  were  written.] 

November  3.  It's  full  moon  with  a  vengeance  to- 
night. Out  of  the  front  door  a  field  of  big  turnips,  and 
beyond,  a  spiky  wood  with  red  bands  of  light  behind 
it.  Out  of  the  back  door  an  old  tree  with  just  a  leaf  or 
two  remaining  and  a  moon  perched  in  the  branches. 

=  15  - 


Journal   IQ14 


I  feel  very  deeply  happy  and  free.  Colette  Willy  is  in 
my  thoughts  to-night.  I  feel  in  my  own  self  awake 
and  stretching,  stretching  so  that  I  am  on  tip-toe, 
full  of  happy  joy.  Can  it  be  that  one  can  renew  one- 
self? 

Dear,  dear  Samuel  Butler!  Just  you  wait:  I'll  do 
you  proud.  To-morrow  at  about  10.30,  I  go  into 
action. 

November  15.  It's  very  quiet.  I've  re-read  UEntrave. 
I  suppose  Colette  is  the  only  woman  in  France  who 
does  just  this.  I  don't  care  a  fig  at  present  for  anyone 
I  know  except  her.  But  the  book  to  be  written  is  still 
unwritten.  I  can't  sit  down  and  fire  away  like  J. 

November  16.  A  letter  from  F.  I  had  not  expected  it, 
and  yet,  when  it  came,  it  seemed  quite  inevitable  — 
the  writing,  the  way  the  letters  were  made,  his  con- 
fidence, and  his  warm  sensational  life.  I  wish  he  were 
my  friend;  he's  very  near  to  me.  His  personality 
comes  right  through  his  letters  to  J.  and  I  want  to 
laugh  and  run  into  the  road. 

December  28.  The  year  is  nearly  over.  Snow  has 
fallen,  and  everything  is  white.  It  is  very  cold.  I  have 
changed  the  position  of  my  desk  into  a  corner.  Per- 
haps I  shall  be  able  to  write  far  more  easily  here.  Yes, 
this  is  a  good  place  for  the  desk,  because  I  cannot  see 
out  of  the  stupid  window.  I  am  quite  private.  The 
lamp  stands  on  one  corner  and  in  the  corner.  Its  rays 

-  16  - 


Winter 

fall  on  the  yellow  and  green  Indian  curtain  and  on 
the  strip  of  red  embroidery.  The  forlorn  wind  scarcely 
breathes.  I  love  to  close  my  eyes  a  moment  and  think 
of  the  land  outside,  white  under  the  mingled  snow 
and  moonlight — the  heaps  of  stones  by  the  roadside 
white  —  snow  in  the  furrows.  Mon  Dieu!  How  quiet 
and  how  patient ! 


1915 

January  1.  What  a  vile  little  diary!  But  I  am  deter- 
mined to  keep  it  this  year.  We  saw  the  Old  Year  out 
and  the  New  Year  in.  A  lovely  night,  blue  and  gold. 
The  church  bells  were  ringing.  I  went  into  the  garden 
and  opened  the  gate  and  nearly  —  just  walked  away. 
J.  stood  at  the  window  mashing  an  orange  in  a  cup. 
The  shadow  of  the  rose-tree  lay  on  the  grass  like  a 
tiny  bouquet.  The  moon  and  the  dew  had  put  a 
spangle  on  everything.  But  just  at  12  o'clock  I 
thought  I  heard  footsteps  on  the  road  and  got  fright- 
ened and  ran  back  into  the  house.  But  nobody  passed. 
J.  thought  I  was  a  great  baby  about  the  whole  affair. 
The  ghost  of  L.M.  ran  through  my  heart,  her  hair 
flying,  very  pale,  with  dark  startled  eyes. 

For  this  year  I  have  two  wishes :  to  write,  to  make 
money.  Consider.  With  money  we  could  go  away  as 
we  liked,  have  a  room  in  London,  be  as  free  as  we 
liked,  and  be  independent  and  proud  with  nobodies. 
It  is  only  poverty  that  holds  us  so  tightly.  Well,  J. 
doesn't  want  money  and  won't  earn  money.  I  must. 
How?  First,  get  this  book1  finished.  That  is  a  start. 
When  ?  At  the  end  of  January.  If  you  do  that,  you  are 

1  "  This  book  "  refers,  I  think,  to  a  novel  called  "  Maata,"  of  which 
the  two  opening  chapters  and  a  complete  synopsis  alone  remain. 

=    18    = 


IQI4 


The   Island 


saved.  If  I  wrote  night  and  day  I  could  do  it.  Yes,  I 
could.  Right  O ! 

I  feel  the  new  life  coming  nearer.  I  believe,  just  as 
I  always  have  believed.  Yes,  it  will  come.  All  will  be 
well. 

January  2.  A  horrible  morning  and  afternoon.  Je  me 
sens  incapable  de  tout,  and  at  the  same  time  I  am 
just  not  writing  very  well.  I  must  finish  my  story  to- 
morrow. I  ought  to  work  at  it  all  day,  —  yes,  all  day 
and  into  the  night  if  necessary.  A  vile  day.  J'ai  envie 
de  prier  au  bon  Dieu  comme  le  vieux  pere  Tolstoi. 
Oh,  Lord,  make  me  a  better  creature  to-morrow.  Le 
cceur  me  monte  aux  levres  d'un  gout  de  sang.  Je  me 
deteste  aujourd'hui.  Dined  at  L.'s  and  talked  the  Is- 
land.1 It  is  quite  real  except  that  some  part  of  me  is 
blind  to  it.  Six  months  ago  Fd  have  jumped. 

The  chief  thing  I  feel  lately  about  myself  is  that 
I  am  getting  old.  I  don't  feel  like  a  girl  any  more,  or 
even  like  a  young  woman.  I  feel  really  quite  past  my 
prime.  At  times  the  fear  of  death  is  dreadful.  I  feel 
ever  so  much  older  than  J.  and  that  he  recognises  it, 
I  am  sure.  He  never  used  to,  but  now  he  often  talks 
like  a  young  man  to  an  older  woman.  Well,  perhaps, 
it's  a  good  thing. 

January  3.  A  cold,  ugly  day.  It  was  dark  soon  after 
two.  Spent  it  trying  to  write  and  running  from  my 

1  A  plan,  how  far  serious  I  cannot  say  after  these  years,  of  making  a 
settlement  in  some  remote  island.  It  was  probably  of  the  same  order  of 
seriousness  as  Coleridge's  pantisocratic  colony  on  the  Susquehannah. 

=    19   = 


Journal   1915 

room  into  the  kitchen.  I  could  not  get  really  warm. 
The  day  felt  endless.  Read  in  the  evening,  and  later 
read  with  J.  a  good  deal  of  poetry.  If  I  lived  alone  I 
would  be  very  dependent  on  poetry.  Talked  over  the 
Island  idea  with  J.  For  me  I  know  it  has  come  too 
late. 

January  4.  Woke  early  and  saw  a  snowy  branch 
across  the  window.  It  is  cold,  snow  has  fallen,  and 
now  it  is  thawing.  The  hedges  and  the  trees  are  cov- 
ered with  beads  of  water.  Very  dark,  too,  with  a  wind 
somewhere.  I  long  to  be  alone  for  a  bit. 

I  make  a  vow  to  finish  a  book  this  month.  I'll  write 
all  day  and  at  night  too,  and  get  it  finished.  I  swear. 

January  5.  Saw  the  sun  rise.  A  lovely  apricot  sky 
with  flames  in  it  and  then  a  solemn  pink.  Heavens, 
how  beautiful !  I  heard  a  knocking,  and  went  down- 
stairs. It  was  Benny  cutting  away  the  ivy.  Over  the 
path  lay  the  fallen  nests  —  wisps  of  hay  and  feathers. 
He  looked  like  an  ivy  bush  himself.  I  made  early  tea 
and  carried  it  up  to  J.  who  lay  half  awake  with 
crinkled  eyes.  I  feel  so  full  of  love  to-day  after  having 
seen  the  sun  rise. 

Evening.  Have  written  a  good  deal. 

January  9.  J.  went  to  town.  I  worked  a  little  —  chased 
the  fowls.  One  brown  fowl  refused  to  leave  the  garden. 
Long  after  it  knew  there  was  no  gap  in  the  wire- 

=  20  = 


The   Anxious  Heart 


netting  it  kept  on  running  up  and  down.  I  must  not 
forget  that,  nor  how  cold  it  was,  nor  how  the  mud 
coated  my  thin  shoes.  In  the  evening  L.  and  K.  They 
talked  plans;  but  I  felt  very  antagonistic  to  the 
whole  affair. 

January  10.  Windy  and  dark.  ...  At  night  we  went 
to  L.'s.  It  was  a  warm  night  with  big  drops  of  rain 
falling.  I  didn't  mind  the  going,  but  the  coming  back 
was  rather  awful.  I  was  unwell,  and  tired,  and  my 
heart  could  scarcely  beat.  But  we  made  up  a  song  to 
keep  going.  The  rain  splashed  up  to  my  knees,  and 
I  was  frightened.  L.  was  nice,  very  nice,  sitting  with 
a  piece  of  string  in  his  hand  .  .  . 

January  n.  I  got  up  in  the  dark  to  be  ready  for  my 
little  maid  and  watch  the  dawn  coming.  It  wasn't  up 
to  much,  though.  I  am  wretched.  It  is  a  bright  wink- 
ing day.  Oh  God,  my  God,  let  me  work ! 
Wasted !  Wasted ! 

January  12.  Have  been  in  more  of  a  state  of  virtue 
to-day.  Actually  finished  the  story,  Brave  Love,1  and 
I  don't  know  what  to  make  of  it  even  now.  Read  it 
to  J.  who  was  also  puzzled.  Violent  headache,  but 
rather  happy. 

January  20.  A  man  outside  is  breaking  stones.  The 
day  is  utterly  quiet.  Sometimes  a  leaf  rustles  and  a 

1  Of  this  story  I  have  found  only  the  opening  pages. 
=  21   = 


Journal   IQ15 

strange  puff  of  wind  passes  the  window.  The  old  man 
chops,  chops,  as  though  it  were  a  heart  beating  out 
there. 

In  the  afternoon  there  came  a  violent  storm,  but 
we  walked  over  to  C.'s,  dined  with  them  and  the 
L.'s  and  the  S.'s  and  had  a  play  after.  Late  we  went 
to  the  L.'s  to  sleep,  very  untidy  —  newspapers  and 
faded  mistletoe.  I  hardly  slept  at  all,  but  it  was 
nice. 

A  stormy  day.  We  walked  back  this  morning.  It 
has  rained  and  snowed  and  hailed  and  the  wind 
blows.  The  dog  at  the  mill  howls.  A  man  far  away  is 
playing  the  bugle.  I  have  read  and  sewed  to-day,  but 
not  written  a  word.  I  want  to  to-night.  It  is  so  funny 
to  sit  quietly  sewing,  while  my  heart  is  never  for  a 
moment  still.  I  am  dreadfully  tired  in  head  and  body. 
This  sad  place  is  killing  me.  I  live  upon  old  made-up 
dreams ;  but  they  do  not  deceive  either  of  us. 

January  21. 1  am  in  the  sitting-room  downstairs.  The 
wind  howls  outside,  but  here  it  is  so  warm  and  pleas- 
ant. It  looks  like  a  real  room  where  real  people  live. 
My  sewing-basket  is  on  the  table:  under  the  book- 
case are  poked  J.'s  old  house  shoes.  The  black  chair, 
half  in  shadow,  looks  as  if  a  happy  person  had 
sprawled  there.  We  had  roast  mutton  and  onion  sauce 
and  baked  rice  for  dinner.  It  sounds  right.  I  have  run 
the  ribbons  through  my  underclothes  with  a  hair-pin 
in  the  good  home  way.  But  my  anxious  heart  is  eat- 
ing up  my  body,  eating  up  my  nerves,  eating  up  my 

=  22  = 


Londo 


n 


brain.  I  feel  this  poison  slowly  filling  my  veins  — 
every  particle  becoming  slowly  tainted.  ...  I  am 
never,  never  calm,  never  for  an  instant.  I  remember 
years  ago  saying  I  wished  I  were  one  of  those  happy 
people  who  can  suffer  so  far  and  then  collapse  or  be- 
come exhausted.  But  I  am  just  the  opposite.  The 
more  I  suffer,  the  more  of  fiery  energy  I  feel  to  bear 
it. 

January  22.  Weather  worse  than  ever.  At  tea-time  I 
surprised  myself  by  breaking  down.  I  simply  felt  for 
a  moment  overcome  with  anguish  and  came  upstairs 
and  put  my  head  on  the  black  cushion.  My  longing 
for  cities  engrosses  me. 

January  23.  The  old  man  breaking  stones  again.  A 
thick  white  mist  reaches  the  edge  of  the  field. 

January  26.  Went  to  London.  We  found  B.C.  had 
arrived;  so  D.  put  us  up.  D.'s  flat  looks  lovely  to  me. 
Had  tea  at  the  Criterion  with  C.  and  D.  Had  my 
hands  done.  In  the  evening  went  to  the  Oxford  and 
saw  Marie  Lloyd,  who  was  very  good.  Slept  on  the 
big  divan  in  A.'s  room.  In  the  afternoon  it  was  very 
foggy  in  London ;  but  the  relief  to  be  there  was  im- 
mense. 

January  27.  Met  a  woman  who'd  been  in  the  cinema 
with  me  —  her  pink  roses  in  her  belt  and  hollow 

=  23  = 


Journal   1915 


lovely  eyes  and  battered  hair.  I  shall  not  forget  her. 
No,  no.  She  was  wonderful.1 

February  1.  A  slight  attack  of  'flu'  is  bowling  me 
over.  There  is  a  glimpse  of  sun.  The  trees  look  as 
though  they  were  hanging  out  to  dry. 

My  cold  gained  on  me  all  day.  I  read  the  lonely 
Nietzsche ;  but  I  felt  a  bit  ashamed  of  my  feelings  for 
this  man  in  the  past.  He  is,  if  you  like,  "  human,  all 
too  human."  Read  until  late.  I  felt  wretched  simply 
beyond  words.  Life  was  like  sawdust  and  sand. 
Talked  short  stories  to  J. 

February  2.  I  feel  a  bit  more  cheerful  to-day  because 
I  don't  look  quite  so  revolting  as  I  have  done. 

No,  the  day  ended  in  being  as  bad  as  ever.  For 
one  thing  my  illness  is  really  severe.  I  have  been  em- 
broidering my  kimono  with  black  wool.  Bah!  What 
rot!  What  do  I  care  for  such  rubbish! 

February  3.  I  can  do  nothing.  Have  tidied  my  desk 
and  taken  some  quinine  and  that's  all.  But  I  know 
I  shall  go,  because  otherwise  I'll  die  of  despair.  My 
head  is  so  hot,  but  my  hands  are  cold.  Perhaps  I  am 
dead  and  just  pretending  to  live  here.  There  is,  at 
any  rate,  no  sign  of  life  in  me. 

February  15.  Went  to  London  with  J. 

1  She  was,  probably,  the  original  of  Miss  Moss  in  "  Pictures."  In  1 9 1 3 
K.M.  had  acted  as  a  super  in  various  cinematograph  productions. 

-    24  - 


A   Journey    to   France 


February  16.  Came  to  Paris. 
February  19.  Came  to  Gray. 

[An  unposted  letter  written  in  the  diary.] 
February  20.  England  is  like  a  dream.  I  am  sitting 
at  the  window  of  a  little  square  room  furnished  with 
a  bed,  a  wax  apple,  and  an  immense  flowery  clock. 
Outside  the  window  there  is  a  garden  full  of  wall 
flowers  and  blue  enamel  saucepans.  The  clocks  are 
striking  five  and  the  last  rays  of  sun  pour  under  the 
swinging  blind.  It  is  very  hot  —  the  kind  of  heat  that 
makes  one's  cheek  burn  in  infancy.  But  I  am  so 
happy  I  must  just  send  you  a  word  on  a  spare  page 
of  my  diary,  dear. 

I  have  had  some  dreadful  adventures  on  my  way 
here  because  the  place  is  within  the  Zone  of  the 
armies  and  not  allowed  to  women.  The  last  old 
Pa-man  who  saw  my  passport,  'M.  le  Colonel/ 
very  grand  with  a  black  tea-cosy  and  gold  tas- 
sel on  his  head,  and  smoking  what  lady  novelists 
call  a  '  heavy  Egyptian  cigarette,'  nearly  sent  me 
back. 

But,  my  dear,  it's  such  wonderful  country  —  all 
rivers  and  woods  and  large  birds  that  look  blue  in 
the  sunlight.  I  keep  thinking  of  you  and  L.  The 
French  soldiers  are  pour  rire.  Even  when  they  are 
wounded  they  seem  to  lean  out  of  their  sheds  and 
wave  their  bandages  at  the  train.  But  I  saw  some 
prisoners  to-day  —  not  at  all  funny.  Oh,  I  have  so 

=  25  = 


Journal   1915 

much  to  tell  you  I'd  better  not  begin.  We  shall  see 
each  other  some  day,  won't  we,  darling? 

[Another  unposted  letter.] 
I  seem  to  have  just  escaped  the  prison  cell,  J.  dear- 
est,—  because  I  find  this  place  is  in  the  zone  of  the 
armies  and  therefore  forbidden  to  women.  However, 
my  Aunt's  illness  pulled  me  through.  I  had  some 
really  awful  moments.  Outside  the  station  he  was 
waiting.  He  merely  sang  (so  typical)  "  Follow  me, 
but  not  as  though  you  were  doing  so  "  until  we  came 
to  a  tiny  toll-house  by  the  river,  against  which  leant 
a  faded  cab.  But  once  fed  with  my  suit-case  and  our 
two  selves,  it  dashed  off  like  the  wind,  the  door  open- 
ing and  shutting,  to  his  horror,  as  he  is  not  allowed 
in  cabs.  We  drove  to  a  village  near  by,  to  a  large 
white  house  where  they  had  taken  a  room  for  me  —  a 
most  extraordinary  room  furnished  with  a  bed,  a  wax 
apple  and  an  immense  flowery  clock.  It's  very  hot. 
The  sun  streams  through  the  blind.  The  garden  out- 
side is  full  of  wallflowers  and  blue  enamel  saucepans. 
It  would  make  you  laugh,  too.  .  .  . 

[The  Journal  continues.] 
The  curious  thing  is  that  I  could  not  concentrate 
on  the  end  of  the  journey.  I  simply  felt  so  happy  that 
I  leaned  out  of  the  window  with  my  arms  along  the 
brass  rail  and  my  feet  crossed  and  basked  in  the  sun- 
light and  the  wonderful  country  unfolding.  At  Cha- 
teaudun  where  we  had  to  change  I  went  to  the  Buffet 

=  26  = 


A  Buffet 

to  drink.  A  big  pale  green  room  with  a  large  stove 
jutting  out  and  a  buffet  with  coloured  bottles.  Two 
women,  their  arms  folded,  leaned  against  the  counter. 
A  little  boy,  very  pale,  swung  from  table  to  table,  tak- 
ing the  orders.  It  was  full  of  soldiers  sitting  back  in 
their  chairs  and  swinging  their  legs  and  eating.  The 
men  shouted  through  the  windows. 

The  little  boy  favoured  me  with  a  glass  of  horrible 
black  coffee.  He  served  the  soldiers  with  a  kind  of 
dreary  contempt.  In  the  porch  an  old  man  carried 
a  pail  of  brown  spotted  fish  —  large  fish,  like  the  fish 
one  sees  in  glass  cases  swimming  through  forests  of 
beautiful  pressed  seaweed.  The  soldiers  laughed  and 
slapped  each  other.  They  tramped  about  in  their 
heavy  boots.  The  women  looked  after  them,  and 
the  old  man  stood  humbly  waiting  for  someone  to 
attend  to  him,  his  cap  in  his  hands,  as  if  he  knew 
that  the  life  he  represented  in  his  torn  jacket,  with 
his  basket  of  fish  —  his  peaceful  occupation  —  did  not 
exist  any  more  and  had  no  right  to  thrust  itself  in 
here. 

The  last  moments  of  the  journey  I  was  very  fright- 
ened. We  arrived  at  Gray,  and  one  by  one,  like 
women  going  in  to  see  a  doctor,  we  slipped  through 
a  door  into  a  hot  room  completely  fitted  with  two 
tables  and  two  colonels,  like  colonels  in  comic  opera, 
big  shiny  grey-whiskered  men  with  a  touch  of  burnt- 
red  in  their  cheeks,  both  smoking,  one  a  cigarette 
with  a  long  curly  ash  hanging  from  it.  He  had  a 
ring  on  his  fingers.  Sumptuous  and  omnipotent  he 

=  27  = 


Journal   1915 

looked.  I  shut  my  teeth.  I  kept  my  fingers 
from  trembling  as  I  handed  the  passport  and  the 
ticket. 

"  It  won't  do,  it  won't  do  at  all,"  said  my  colonel 
and  looked  at  me  for  what  seemed  an  age  but  in 
silence.  His  eyes  were  like  two  grey  stones.  He  took 
my  passport  to  the  other  colonel,  who  dismissed  the 
objection,  stamped  it,  and  let  me  go.  I  nearly  knelt 
on  the  floor. 

By  the  station  he  stood,  terribly  pale.  He  saluted 
and  smiled  and  said,  "  Turn  to  the  right  and  follow 
me  as  though  you  were  not  following."  Then  fast  we 
went  towards  the  Suspension  Bridge.  He  had  a  post- 
man's bag  on  his  back,  and  a  paper  parcel.  The  street 
was  very  muddy.  From  the  toll  house  by  the  bridge 
a  scraggy  woman,  her  hands  wrapped  in  a  shawl, 
peered  out  at  us.  Against  the  toll  house  leaned  a 
faded  cab.  "Montez!  vite,  vite!  "  said  he.  He  threw 
my  suit-case,  his  letter  bag  and  the  parcel  on  to  the 
floor.  The  driver  sprang  into  activity,  lashed  the  bony 
horse,  and  we  tore  away  with  both  doors  flapping  and 
banging.  They  would  not  keep  shut,  and  he,  who  is 
not  supposed  to  ride  in  cabs,  had  to  try  to  hide. 
Soldiers  passed  all  the  time.  At  the  barracks  he 
stopped  a  moment  and  a  crowd  of  faces  blocked  the 
window.  "  Prends  ga,  mon  vieux,"  he  said,  handing 
over  the  paper  parcel. 

Off  we  flew  again.  By  the  river.  Down  a  long 
strange  white  street  with  houses  on  either  side,  very 
fairy  in  the  late  sunlight.  He  said  "  I  know  you  will 

=  28  = 


Rup ert   Brooke 


like  the  house.  It's  quite  white,  and  so  is  the  room, 
and  the  people  are,  too." 

At  last  we  arrived.  The  woman  of  the  house,  with 
a  serious  baby  in  her  arms,  came  to  the  door. 

"It  is  all  right?" 

"  Yes,  all  right.  Bonjour,  Madame." 

It  was  like  an  elopement. 

[Katherine  Mansfield  returned  to  England  at  the  end  of 
February  and  left  for  Paris  once  more  in  May.] 

Sunday,  May  16.  Paris.  I  dreamed  all  night  of  Rupert 
Brooke.  And  to-day  as  I  left  the  house  he  was  stand- 
ing at  the  door,  with  a  rucksack  on  his  back  and  his 
hat  shading  his  face.  So  after  I  had  posted  J.'s  letter 
I  did  not  go  home.  I  went  a  long,  very  idle  sort  of 
amble  along  the  quais.  It  was  exquisitely  hot:  white 
clouds  lay  upon  the  sky  like  sheets  spread  out  to  dry. 
On  the  big  sandheaps  down  by  the  river  children  had 
hollowed  out  tunnels  and  caverns.  They  sat  in  them, 
stolid  and  content,  their  hair  glistening  in  the  sun. 
Now  and  then  a  man  lay  stretched  on  his  face,  his 
head  in  his  arms.  The  river  was  full  of  big  silver 
stars;  the  trees  shook,  faintly  glinting  with  light.  I 
found  delightful  places  —  little  squares  with  white 
square  houses.  Quite  hollow  they  looked,  with  the 
windows  gaping  open.  Narrow  streets  arched  over 
with  chestnut  boughs,  or  perhaps  quite  deserted,  with 
a  clock  tower  showing  over  the  roofs.  The  sun  put  a 
spell  on  everything. 

=  29  = 


Journal   1915 

I  crossed  and  recrossed  the  river  and  leaned  over 
the  bridges  and  kept  thinking  we  were  coming  to  a 
park  when  we  weren't.  You  cannot  think  what  a  pleas- 
ure my  invisible,  imaginary  companion  gave  me.  If  he 
had  been  alive  it  would  never  have  possibly  occurred ; 
but  —  it's  a  game  I  like  to  play  —  to  walk  and  talk 
with  the  dead  who  smile  and  are  silent,  and  free, 
quite  finally  free.  When  I  lived  alone,  I  would  often 
come  home,  put  my  key  in  the  door,  and  find  someone 
there  waiting  for  me.  "  Hullo !  Have  you  been  here 
long?" 

I  suppose  that  sounds  dreadful  rubbish. 

Notre  Dame 
I  am  sitting  on  a  broad  bench  in  the  sun  hard  by 
Notre  Dame.  In  front  of  me  there  is  a  hedge  of  ivy. 
An  old  man  walked  along  with  a  basket  on  his  arm, 
picking  off  the  withered  leaves.  In  the  priests'  garden 
they  are  cutting  the  grass.  I  love  this  big  cathedral. 
The  little  view  I  have  of  it  now  is  of  pointed  narrow 
spires,  fretted  against  the  blue,  and  one  or  two  squat- 
ting stone  parrots  balanced  on  a  little  balcony.  It  is 
like  a  pen-drawing  by  a  Bogey.  And  I  like  the  saints 
with  their  crowns  on  their  collars  and  their  heads  in 
their  hands. 

The  'Life'  of  Life 
I  bought  a  book  by  Henry  James  yesterday  and 
read  it,  as  they  say,  '  until  far  into  the  night.'  It  was 
not  very  interesting  or  very  good,  but  I  can  wade 

=  30  = 


Henry   James 


through  pages  and  pages  of  dull,  turgid  James  for  the 
sake  of  that  sudden  sweet  shock,  that  violent  throb  of 
delight  that  he  gives  me  at  times.  I  don't  doubt  this  is 
genius :  only  there  is  an  extraordinary  amount  of  pan 
and  an  amazingly  rafjine  flash  — 

One  thing  I  want  to  annotate.  His  hero,  Bernard 
Longueville,  brilliant,  rich,  dark,  agile,  etc.,  though  a 
witty  companion,  is  perhaps  wittiest  and  most  amused 
when  he  is  alone,  and  preserves  his  best  things  for 
himself.  .  .  .  All  the  attributive  adjectives  apart  I  am 
witty,  I  know,  and  a  good  companion  —  but  I  feel  my 
case  is  exactly  like  his  —  the  amount  of  minute  and 
delicate  joy  I  get  out  of  watching  people  and  things 
when  I  am  alone  is  simply  enormous  —  I  really  only 
have  '  perfect  fun '  with  myself.  When  I  see  a  little 
girl  running  by  on  her  heels  like  a  fowl  in  the  wet,  and 
say  '  My  dear,  there's  a  gertie,'  I  laugh  and  enjoy  it 
as  I  never  would  with  anybody.  Just  the  same  applies 
to  my  feeling  for  what  is  called  '  nature/  Other  people 
won't  stop  and  look  at  the  things  I  want  to  look  at  or, 
if  they  do,  they  stop  to  please  me  or  to  humour  me  or 
to  keep  the  peace.  But  I  am  so  made  that  as  sure  as  I 
am  with  anyone,  I  begin  to  give  consideration  to  their 
opinions  and  their  desires,  and  they  are  not  worth  half 
the  consideration  that  mine  are.  I  don't  miss  J.  at  all 
now  —  I  don't  want  to  go  home,  I  feel  quite  content 
to  live  here,  in  a  furnished  room,  and  watch.  It's  a 
pure  question  of  weather,  that's  what  I  believe.  (A 
terrific  Gertie  has  just  passed.)  Life  with  other  people 
becomes  a  blur:  it  does  with  J.,  but  it's  enormously 


3i 


Journal   IQ15 

valuable  and  marvellous  when  I'm  alone,  the  detail 
of  life,  the  life  of  life. 

Pere  de  famille 

This  family  began  very  modest  with  Mamma,  ex- 
tremely fat,  with  a  black  moustache  and  a  little  round 
toque  covered  with  poached  pansies,  and  the  baby  boy, 
bursting  out  of  an  English  tweed  suit  that  was  in- 
tended for  a  Norfolk,  but  denied  its  country  at  the  sec- 
ond seam.  They  had  barely  settled  in  their  places  and 
pinched  every  separate  piece  of  bread  in  the  basket 
and  chosen  the  crustiest  when  two  young  men  in  pale 
blue  uniforms,  with  about  as  much  moustache  as 
mother,  appeared  at  the  doorway  of  the  restaurant 
and  were  hailed  with  every  appearance  of  enthusiasm 
by  sonny,  who  waved  a  serviette  about  the  size  of  a 
single  bed  sheet  at  them.  Mother  was  embraced ;  they 
sat  down  side  by  side  and  were  presently  joined  by  an 
unfortunate  overgrown  boy  whose  complexion  had  en- 
joyed every  possible  form  of  Friihlingserwachen  and 
who  looked  as  though  he  spent  his  nights  under  an 
eiderdown  eating  chocolate  biscuits  with  the  window 
shut.  .  .  . 

Five  single  bed  sheets  were  tucked  into  five  collars 
—  Five  pairs  of  eyes  read  over  the  menu. 

Suddenly  with  a  cry  of  delight  up  flew  Mamma's 
arms  —  up  flew  sonny's  —  the  two  young  soldiers 
sprang  to  their  feet,  the  etudiant  came  out  in  no  end 
of  a  perspiration  as  a  stout  florid  man  appeared,  and 
walked  towards  them.  The  waitress  hovered  round  the 

=  32  = 


Travelling  Alone 


table,  delighted  beyond  words  at  this  exhibition  of 
vie  de  famille.  She  felt  like  their  own  bonne  —  she  felt 
she  had  known  them  for  years.  Heaven  knows  what 
memories  she  had  of  taking  M.  Roue  his  hot  water,  of 
being  found  by  M.  Paul,  looking  for  his  shirt  stud  on 
his  bedroom  floor,  on  her  charming  little  hands  and 
her  still  more  delicious  knees ! 

Travelling  Alone 

Was  it  simply  her  own  imagination,  or  could  there 
be  any  truth  in  this  feeling  that  waiters  —  waiters 
especially  and  hotel  servants — adopted  an  imperti- 
nent, arrogant  and  slightly  amused  attitude  towards 
a  woman  who  travelled  alone?  Was  it  just  her 
wretched  female  self-consciousness  ?  No,  she  really  did 
not  think  it  was.  For  even  when  she  was  feeling  at  her 
happiest,  at  her  freest,  she  would  become  aware,  quite 
suddenly,  of  the  *  tone  '  of  the  waiter  or  the  hotel  serv- 
ant. And  it  was  extraordinary  how  it  wrecked  her 
sense  of  security,  how  it  made  her  feel  that  something 
malicious  was  being  plotted  against  her  and  that 
everybody  and  everything  —  yes,  even  to  inanimate 
objects  like  chairs  or  tables  —  was  secretly  '  in  the 
know,'  waiting  for  that  ominous  infallible  thing  to 
happen  to  her,  which  always  did  happen,  which  was 
bound  to  happen,  to  every  woman  on  earth  who  trav- 
elled alone ! 

The  waiter  prodded  a  keyhole  with  a  bunch  of  keys, 
wrenched  one  round,  flung  the  grey-painted  door  open 
and  stood  against  it,  waiting  for  her  to  pass  in.  He 

=  33  = 


Journal   IQ15 


held  his  feather  duster  upright  in  his  hand  like  a 
smoky  torch. 

"  Here  is  a  nice  little  room  for  Madame,"  said  the 
waiter  insinuatingly.  As  she  entered,  he  brushed  past 
her,  opened  the  groaning  window  and  unhooked  the 
shutters. 

[After  some  weeks  in  rooms  at  Elgin  Crescent,  in  July  we 
took  a  house  at  No.  5  Acacia  Road,  St.  John's  Wood.  Here 
Katherine  Mansfield's  brother  "  Chummie  "  came  to  stay  with 
her  for  a  week  before  going  to  the  front.  He  was  killed  almost 
immediately.  The  following  entry  is  a  record  of  one  of  their 
conversations  together.] 

Evening 
October.  They  are  walking  up  and  down  the  garden 
in  Acacia  Road.  It  is  dusky;  the  Michaelmas  daisies 
are  bright  as  feathers.  From  the  old  fruit-tree  at  the 
bottom  of  the  garden  —  the  slender  tree  rather  like  a 
poplar  —  there  falls  a  little  round  pear,  hard  as  a 
stone. 

"Did  you  hear  that,  Katie?  Can  you  find  it?  By 
Jove  —  that  familiar  sound." 

Their  hands  move  over  the  thin  moist  grass.  He 
picks  it  up,  and,  unconsciously,  as  of  old,  polishes  it  on 
his  handkerchief. 

"  Do  you  remember  the  enormous  number  of  pears 
there  used  to  be  on  that  old  tree?  " 

"  Down  by  the  violet  bed." 

"  And  how  after  there'd  been  a  Southerly  Buster  we 
used  to  go  out  with  clothes  baskets  to  pick  them  up?  " 

=  34  - 


'.i*!S?f*i 


e(C hummie ,' '    October  1915 


New  Zealand  Memories 


"  And  how  while  we  stooped  they  went  on  falling, 
bouncing  on  our  backs  and  heads  ?  " 

"And  how  far  they  used  to  be  scattered,  ever  so  far, 
under  the  violet  leaves,  down  the  steps,  right  down  to 
the  lily-lawn?  We  used  to  find  them  trodden  in  the 
grass.  And  how  soon  the  ants  got  to  them.  I  can  see 
now  that  little  round  hole  with  a  sort  of  fringe  of 
brown  pepper  round  it." 

"  Do  you  know  that  I've  never  seen  pears  like  them 
since?  " 

"  They  were  so  bright,  canary  yellow  —  and  small. 
And  the  peel  was  so  thin  and  the  pips  jet  —  jet  black. 
First  you  pulled  out  the  little  stem  and  sucked  it.  It 
was  faintly  sour,  and  then  you  ate  them  always  from 
the  top  —  core  and  all." 

"  The  pips  were  delicious." 

"  Do  you  remember  sitting  on  the  pink  garden 
seat?" 

"  I  shall  never  forget  that  pink  garden  seat.  It  is 
the  only  garden  seat  for  me.  Where  is  it  now? 
Do  you  think  we  shall  be  allowed  to  sit  on  it  in 
Heaven?  " 

"  It  always  wobbled  a  bit  and  there  were  usually 
the  marks  of  a  snail  on  it." 

"  Sitting  on  that  seat,  swinging  our  legs  and  eating 
the  pears  —  " 

"  But  isn't  it  extraordinary  how  deep  our  happiness 
was  —  how  positive  —  deep,  shining,  warm.  I  remem- 
ber the  way  we  used  to  look  at  each  other  and  smile  — 
do  you?  — ^sharing  a  secret  .  .  .  What  was  it?  " 

=  35  = 


Journal   1915 

"  I  think  it  was  the  family  feeling  —  we  were  almost 
like  one  child.  I  always  see  us  walking  about  together, 
looking  at  things  together  with  the  same  eyes,  discuss- 
ing. ...  I  felt  that  again  —  just  now  —  when  we 
looked  for  the  pear  in  the  grass.  I  remembered  ruffling 
the  violet  leaves  with  you  — Oh,  that  garden !  Do  you 
remember  that  some  of  the  pears  we  found  used  to 
have  little  teeth  marks  in  them  ?  " 

"  Yes." 

"Who  bit  them?" 

"  It  was  always  a  mystery." 

He  puts  his  arm  round  her.  They  pace  up  and  down. 
And  the  round  moon  shines  over  the  pear  tree,  and  the 
ivy  walls  of  the  garden  glitter  like  metal.  The  air 
smells  chill  .  .  .  heavy  .  .  .  very  cold. 

"  We  shall  go  back  there  one  day  —  when  it's  all 
over." 

"  We'll  go  back  together." 

"  And  find  everything  —  " 

"Everything!" 

She  leans  against  his  shoulder.  The  moonlight  deep- 
ens. Now  they  are  facing  the  back  of  the  house.  A 
square  of  light  shows  in  the  window. 

"  Give  me  your  hand.  You  know  I  shall  always  be 
a  stranger  here." 

"  Yes,  darling,  I  know." 

"  Walk  up  and  down  once  more  and  then  we'll  go 
in." 

"  It's  so  curious  — my  absolute  confidence  that  I'll 
come  back.  I  feel  it's  as  certain  as  this  pear." 

=  36  = 


Death 


"  I  feel  that  too." 

"  I  couldn't  not  come  back.  You  know  that  feeling. 
It's  awfully  mysterious." 

The  shadows  on  the  grass  are  long  and  strange;  a 
puff  of  strange  wind  whispers  in  the  ivy  and  the  old 
moon  touches  them  with  silver. 

She  shivers. 

"  You're  cold." 

"Dreadfully  cold." 

He  puts  his  arm  round  her.  Suddenly  he  kisses 
her  — 

"  Good-bye,  darling." 

"  Ah,  why  do  you  say  that !  " 

"  Darling,  good-bye  .  .  .  good-bye !  " 

October  29.  A  misty,  misty  evening.  I  want  to  write 
down  the  fact  that  not  only  am  I  not  afraid  of  death 
—  I  welcome  the  idea  of  death.  I  believe  in  immortal- 
ity because  he  is  not  here,  and  I  long  to  join  him.  First, 
my  darling,  I've  got  things  to  do  for  both  of  us,  and 
then  I  will  come  as  quickly  as  I  can.  Dearest  heart,  I 
know  you  are  there,  and  I  live  with  you,  and  I  will 
write  for  you.  Other  people  are  near,  but  they  are  not 
close  to  me.  To  you  only  do  I  belong,  just  as  you  be- 
long to  me.  Nobody  knows  how  often  I  am  with  you. 
Indeed,  I  am  always  with  you,  and  I  begin  to  feel  that 
you  know  —  that  when  I  leave  this  house  and  this 
place  it  will  be  with  you,  and  I  will  never  even  for  the 
shortest  space  of  time  be  away  from  you.  You  have 
me.  You're  in  my  flesh  as  well  as  in  my  soul.  I  give 

=  37  = 


Journal   1015 


others  my  "  surplus  "  love,  but  to  you  I  hold  and  to 
you  I  give  my  deepest  love. 

[In  November  Katherine  Mansfield  gave  up  the  house  in 
Acacia  Road,  and  went  to  the  south  of  France.  I  went  with 
her,  but  returned  to  England  after  three  weeks.] 


November,  Bandol,  France.  Brother.  I  think  I  have 
known  for  a  long  time  that  life  was  over  for  me,  but  I 
never  realized  it  or  acknowledged  it  until  my  brother 
died.  Yes,  though  he  is  lying  in  the  middle  of  a  little 
wood  in  France  and  I  am  still  walking  upright  and 
feeling  the  sun  and  the  wind  from  the  sea,  I  am  just  as 
much  dead  as  he  is.  The  present  and  the  future  mean 
nothing  to  me.  I  am  no  longer  "  curious  "  about  peo- 
ple ;  I  do  not  wish  to  go  anywhere ;  and  the  only  pos- 
sible value  that  anything  can  have  for  me  is  that  it 
should  put  me  in  mind  of  something  that  happened 
or  was  when  he  was  alive. 

"  Do  you  remember,  Katie  ?  "  I  hear  his  voice  in  the 
trees  and  flowers,  in  scents  and  light  and  shadow. 
Have  people,  apart  from  these  far-away  people,  ever 
existed  for  me?  Or  have  they  always  failed  and  faded 
because  I  denied  them  reality?  Supposing  I  were  to 
die  as  I  sit  at  this  table,  playing  with  my  Indian  paper- 
knife,  what  would  the  difference  be  ?  No  difference  at 
all.  Then  why  don't  I  commit  suicide?  Because  I  feel 
I  have  a  duty  to  perform  to  the  lovely  time  when  we 
were  both  alive.  I  want  to  write  about  it,  and  he 
wanted  me  to.  We  talked  it  over  in  my  little  top  room 

=  38  = 


A   W  oman'  s  Song 


in  London.  I  said:  I  will  just  put  on  the  front  page: 
To  my  brother,  Leslie  Heron  Beauchamp.  Very  well: 
it  shall  be  done.  .  .  . 

The  wind  died  down  at  sunset.  Half  a  ring  of  moon 
hangs  in  the  hollow  air.  It  is  very  quiet.  Somewhere  I 
can  hear  a  woman  crooning  a  song.  Perhaps  she  is 
crouched  before  the  stove  in  the  corridor,  for  it  is  the 
kind  of  song  that  a  woman  sings  before  a  fire  —  brood- 
ing, warm,  sleepy,  and  safe.  I  see  a  little  house  with 
flower  patches  under  the  windows  and  the  soft  mass 
of  a  haystack  at  the  back.  The  fowls  have  all  gone  to 
roost  —  they  are  woolly  blurs  on  the  perches.  The 
pony  is  in  the  stable  with  a  cloth  on.  The  dog  lies  in 
the  kennel,  his  head  on  his  forepaws.  The  cat  sits  up 
beside  the  woman,  her  tail  tucked  in,  and  the  man, 
still  young  and  careless,  comes  climbing  up  the  back 
road.  Suddenly  a  spot  of  light  shows  in  the  window 
and  on  the  pansy  bed  below,  and  he  walks  quicker, 
whistling. 

But  where  are  these  comely  people?  These  young 
strong  people  with  hard  healthy  bodies  and  curling 
hair?  They  are  not  saints  or  philosophers;  they  are 
decent  human  beings  — but  where  are  they? 

Wednesday.  {December '.]  To-day  I  am  hardening  my 
heart.  I  am  walking  all  round  my  heart  and  building 
up  the  defences.  I  do  not  mean  to  leave  a  loophole  even 
for  a  tuft  of  violets  to  grow  in.  Give  me  a  hard  heart, 
O  Lord !  Lord,  harden  thou  my  heart ! 

=  39  = 


Journal   1915 

This  morning  I  could  walk  a  little.  So  I  went  to  the 
Post  Office.  It  was  bright  with  sun.  The  palm-trees 
stood  up  into  the  air,  crisp  and  shining ;  the  blue  gums 
hung  heavy  with  sun  as  is  their  wont.  When  I  reached 
the  road  I  heard  a  singing.  A  funny  thought ..."  The 
English  have  come !  "  But  of  course,  it  was  not  they. 

Sunday.  [December.']  Ten  minutes  past  four.  I  am 
sure  that  this  Sunday  is  the  worst  of  all  my  life.  I've 
touched  bottom.  Even  my  heart  doesn't  beat  any 
longer.  I  only  keep  alive  by  a  kind  of  buzz  of  blood  in 
my  veins.  Now  the  dark  is  coming  back  again ;  only 
at  the  windows  there  is  a  white  glare.  My  watch  ticks 
loudly  and  strongly  on  the  bed  table,  as  though  it  were 
rich  with  a  minute  life,  while  I  faint  —  I  die. 

It  is  evening  again.  The  sea  runs  very  high.  It  frets, 
sweeps  up  and  over,  hugs,  leaps  upon  the  rocks.  In  the 
sharp  metallic  light  the  rocks  have  a  reddish  tinge. 
Above  them  a  broad  band  of  green  mixed  with  a  rich 
sooty  black;  above  it  the  cone  of  a  violet  mountain; 
above  the  mountain  a  light  blue  sky  shining  like  the 
inside  of  a  wet  sea-shell.  Every  moment  the  light 
changes.  Even  as  I  write,  it  is  no  longer  hard.  Some 
small  white  clouds  top  the  mountain  like  tossed-up 
smoke.  And  now  a  purple  colour,  very  menacing  and 
awful,  is  pulling  over  the  sky.  The  trees  tumble  about 
in  the  unsteady  light.  A  dog  barks.  The  gardener,  talk- 
ing to  himself,  shuffles  across  the  new  raked  paths, 
picks  up  his  weed  basket  and  goes  off.  Two  lovers  are 
walking  together  by  the  side  of  the  sea.  They  are  muf- 

=  40  = 


Illness 

fled  up  in  coats.  She  has  a  red  handkerchief  on  her 
head.  They  walk,  very  proud  and  careless,  hugging 
each  other  and  braving  the  wind. 

I  am  ill  to-day  —  I  cannot  walk  at  all  —  and  in 
pain. 

[The  illness  from  which  Katherine  Mansfield  suffered  was 
a  rheumatic  pain  which  had  a  pernicious  effect  on  the  action 
of  her  heart.  It  had  no  connection  with  the  pulmonary  tubercu- 
losis of  which  she  died.  This  did  not  appear  until  two  years 
later,  in  December  1917.  Katherine  Mansfield  was  always 
convinced  that  she  would  die  of  heart-failure.] 

An  Encounter 

This  afternoon  I  did  not  go  for  a  walk.  There  is  a 
long  stone  embankment  that  goes  out  into  the  sea. 
Huge  stones  on  either  side  and  a  little  rough  goat 
path  in  the  centre.  When  I  came  to  the  end  the  sun  was 
going  down.  So,  feeling  extremely  solitary  and  ro- 
mantic, I  sat  me  down  on  a  stone  and  watched  the  red 
sun,  which  looked  horribly  like  a  morsel  of  tinned 
apricot,  sink  into  a  sea  like  a  huge  junket.  I  began, 
feebly  but  certainly  perceptibly,  to  harp :  "  Alone  be- 
tween sea  and  sky  etc."  But  suddenly  I  saw  a  minute 
speck  on  the  bar  coming  towards  me.  It  grew,  it 
turned  into  a  young  officer  in  dark  blue,  slim,  with  an 
olive  skin,  fine  eyebrows,  long  black  eyes,  a  fine  silky 
moustache. 

"  You  are  alone,  Madame?  " 

"  Alone,  Monsieur." 

"  You  are  living  at  the  hotel,  Madame?  " 

=  41  = 


Journal   1915 


"  At  the  hotel,  Monsieur." 

"  Ah,  I  have  noticed  you  walking  alone  several 
times,  Madame." 

"  It  is  possible,  Monsieur." 
He  blushed  and  put  his  hand  to  his  cap. 
"  I  am  very  indiscreet,  Madame." 
"  Very  indiscreet,  Monsieur." 

[At  the  end  of  December  1915  I  returned  to  Bandol.  There 
we  took  a  tiny  four-roomed  villa,  Villa  Pauline,  with  an  almond- 
tree  that  tapped  at  the  window  of  the  salle  a  manger.  There  we 
stayed  until  April  1916;  and  there  K.M.  wrote  the  first  version 
of  Prelude.] 


igi6 

January  22.  [Villa  Pauline,  Bandol.~]  Now,  really, 
what  is  it  that  I  do  want  to  write?  I  ask  myself,  Am  I 
less  of  a  writer  than  I  used  to  be?  Is  the  need  to  write 
less  urgent?  Does  it  still  seem  as  natural  to  me  to  seek 
that  form  of  expression?  Has  speech  fulfilled  it?  Do 
I  ask  anything  more  than  to  relate,  to  remember,  to 
assure  myself? 

There  are  times  when  these  thoughts  half-frighten 
me  and  very  nearly  convince.  I  say :  You  are  now  so 
fulfilled  in  your  own  being,  in  being  alive,  in  living,  in 
aspiring  towards  a  greater  sense  of  life  and  a  deeper 
loving,  the  other  thing  has  gone  out  of  you. 

But  no,  at  bottom  I  am  not  convinced,  for  at  bot- 
tom never  has  my  desire  been  so  ardent.  Only  the  form 
that  I  would  choose  has  changed  utterly.  I  feel  no 
longer  concerned  with  the  same  appearance  of  things. 
The  people  who  lived  or  whom  I  wished  to  bring  into 
my  stories  don't  interest  me  any  more.  The  plots  of 
my  stories  leave  me  perfectly  cold.  Granted  that  these 
people  exist  and  all  the  differences,  complexities  and 
resolutions  are  true  to  them  —  why  should  /  write 
about  them?  They  are  not  near  me.  All  the  false 
threads  that  bound  me  to  them  are  cut  away  quite. 

Now  —  now  I  want  to  write  recollections  of  my 
own  country.  Yes,  I  want  to  write  about  my  own 

=  43  = 


Journal   1916 

country  till  I  simply  exhaust  my  store.  Not  only  be- 
cause it  is  "  a  sacred  debt  "  that  I  pay  to  my  country 
because  my  brother  and  I  were  born  there,  but  also 
because  in  my  thoughts  I  range  with  him  over  all  the 
remembered  places.  I  am  never  far  away  from  them. 
I  long  to  renew  them  in  writing. 

Ah,  the  people  —  the  people  we  loved  there  —  of 
them,  too,  I  want  to  write.  Another  "  debt  of  love."  Oh, 
I  want  for  one  moment  to  make  our  undiscovered 
country  leap  into  the  eyes  of  the  Old  World.  It  must 
be  mysterious,  as  though  floating.  It  must  take  the 
breath.  It  must  be  "  one  of  those  islands.  ..."  I  shall 
tell  everything,  even  of  how  the  laundry-basket 
squeaked  at  75.  But  all  must  be  told  with  a  sense  of 
mystery,  a  radiance,  an  afterglow,  because  you,  my 
little  sun  of  it,  are  set.  You  have  dropped  over  the 
dazzling  brim  of  the  world.  Now  I  must  play  my  part. 

Then  I  want  to  write  poetry.  I  feel  always  trembling 
on  the  brink  of  poetry.  The  almond  tree,  the  birds,  the 
little  wood  where  you  are,  the  flowers  you  do  not  see, 
the  open  window  out  of  which  I  lean  and  dream  that 
you  are  against  my  shoulder,  and  the  times  that  your 
photograph  "  looks  sad."  But  especially  I  want  to 
write  a  kind  of  long  elegy  to  you  .  .  .  perhaps  not  in 
poetry.  Nor  perhaps  in  prose.  Almost  certainly  in  a 
kind  of  special  -prose. 

And,  lastly,  I  want  to  keep  a  kind  of  minute  note- 
book, to  be  published  some  day.  That's  all.  No  novels, 
no  problem  stories,  nothing  that  is  not  simple,  open. 

K.M. 

=  44  = 


The   Decision 


February  13.  I  have  written  practically  nothing  yet, 
and  now  again  the  time  is  getting  short.  There  is  noth- 
ing done.  I  am  no  nearer  my  achievement  than  I  was 
two  months  ago,  and  I  keep  half-doubting  my  will  to 
perform  anything.  Each  time  I  make  a  move  my  de- 
mon says  at  almost  the  same  moment :  "  Oh,  yes,  we've 
heard  that  before !  "  And  then  I  hear  R.B.  in  the  Cafe 
Royal,  "Do  you  still  write?"  If  I  went  back  to 
England  without  a  book  finished  I  should  give  myself 
up.  I  should  know  that,  whatever  I  said,  I  was  not 
really  a  writer  and  had  no  claim  to  "  a  table  in  my 
room."  But  if  I  go  back  with  a  book  finished  it  will  be 
a  -profession  de  foi  pour  toujours.  Why  do  I  hesitate 
so  long?  Is  it  just  idleness?  Lack  of  will-power?  Yes, 
I  feel  that's  what  it  is,  and  that's  why  it's  so  immensely 
important  that  I  should  assert  myself.  I  have  put  a 
table  to-day  in  my  room,  facing  a  corner,  but  from 
where  I  sit  I  can  see  some  top  shoots  of  the  almond- 
tree  and  the  sea  sounds  loud.  There  is  a  vase  of  beau- 
tiful geraniums  on  the  table.  Nothing  could  be  nicer 
than  this  spot,  and  it's  so  quiet  and  so  high,  like  sitting 
up  in  a  tree.  I  feel  I  shall  be  able  to  write  here,  espe- 
cially towards  twilight. 

Ah,  once  fairly  alight  —  how  I'd  blaze  and  burn! 
Here  is  a  new  fact.  When  I  am  not  writing  I  feel  my 
brother  calling  me,  and  he  is  not  happy.  Only  when  I 
write  or  am  in  a  state  of  writing  —  a  state  of  "  inspira- 
tion "  —  do  I  feel  that  he  is  calm.  .  .  .  Last  night  I 
dreamed  of  him  and  Father  Zossima.  Father  Zos- 
sima  said :  "  Do  not  let  the  new  man  die."  My  brother 


=  45  = 


Journal  igi6 

was  certainly  there.  But  last  evening  he  called  me 
while  I  sat  down  by  the  fire.  At  last  I  obeyed  and  came 
upstairs.  I  stayed  in  the  dark  and  waited.  The  moon 
got  very  bright.  There  were  stars  outside,  very  bright 
twinkling  stars,  that  seemed  to  move  as  I  watched 
them.  The  moon  shone.  I  could  see  the  curve  of  the  sea 
and  the  curve  of  the  land  embracing,  and  above  in  the 
sky  there  was  a  round  sweep  of  cloud.  Perhaps  those 
three  half-circles  were  very  magic.  But  then,  when  I 
leaned  out  of  the  window  I  seemed  to  see  my  brother 
dotted  all  over  the  field — now  on  his  back,  now  on 
his  face,  now  huddled  up,  now  half-pressed  into  the 
earth.  Wherever  I  looked,  there  he  lay.  I  felt  that  God 
showed  him  to  me  like  that  for  some  express  purpose, 
and  I  knelt  down  by  the  bed.  But  I  could  not  pray. 
I  had  done  no  work.  I  was  not  in  an  active  state  of 
grace.  So  I  got  up  finally  and  went  downstairs  again. 
But  I  was  terribly  sad.  .  .  .  The  night  before,  when 
I  lay  in  bed,  I  felt  suddenly  passionate.  I  wanted 
J.  to  embrace  me.  But  as  I  turned  to  speak  to  him  or 
to  kiss  him  I  saw  my  brother  lying  fast  asleep,  and 
I  got  cold.  That  happens  nearly  always.  Perhaps 
because  I  went  to  sleep  thinking  of  him,  I  woke  and 
was  he,  for  quite  a  long  time.  I  felt  my  face  was  his 
serious,  sleepy  face.  I  felt  that  the  lines  of  my 
mouth  were  changed,  and  I  blinked  like  he  did  on 
waking. 

This  year  I  have  to  make  money  and  get  known. 
I  want  to  make  enough  money  to  be  able  to  give  L.M. 
some.  In  fact,  I  want  to  provide  for  her.  That's  my 

=  46  = 


A   Great  Mystery 


idea,  and  to  make  enough  so  that  J.  and  I  shall  be  able 
to  pay  our  debts  and  live  honourably.  I  should  like  to 
have  a  book  published  and  numbers  of  short  stories 
ready.  Ah,  even  as  I  write,  the  smoke  of  a  cigarette 
seems  to  mount  in  a  reflective  way,  and  I  feel  nearer 
that  kind  of  silent,  crystallised  being  that  used  to  be 
almost  me. 

February  14. 1  begin  to  think  of  an  unfinished  memory 
which  has  been  with  me  for  years.  It  is  a  very  good 
story  if  only  I  can  tell  it  right,  and  it  is  called  "  Lena." 
It  plays  in  New  Zealand  and  would  go  in  the  book. 
If  only  I  can  get  right  down  to  it. 

Dear  brother,  as  I  jot  these  notes,  I  am  speaking  to 
you.  To  whom  did  I  always  write  when  I  kept  those 
huge  complaining  diaries?  Was  it  to  myself?  But  now 
as  I  write  these  words  and  talk  of  getting  down  to  the 
New  Zealand  atmosphere,  I  see  you  opposite  to  me, 
I  see  your  thoughtful,  seeing  eyes.  Yes,  it  is  to  you.  We 
were  travelling  —  sitting  opposite  to  each  other  and 
moving  very  fast.  Ah,  my  darling,  how  have  I  kept 
away  from  this  tremendous  joy?  Each  time  I  take  up 
my  pen  you  are  with  me.  You  are  mine.  You  are  my 
playfellow,  my  brother,  and  we  shall  range  all  over  our 
country  together.  It  is  with  you  that  I  see,  and  that  is 
why  I  see  so  clearly.  That  is  a  great  mystery.  My 
brother,  I  have  doubted  these  last  few  days.  I  have 
been  in  dreadful  places.  I  have  felt  that  I  could  not 
come  through  to  you.  But  now,  quite  suddenly,  the 
mists  are  rising,  and  I  see  and  I  know  you  are  near 

=  47  = 


Journal  igi6 


me.  You  are  more  vividly  with  me  now  this  moment 
than  if  you  were  alive  and  I  were  writing  to  you  from 
a  short  distance  away.  As  you  speak  my  name,  the 
name  you  call  me  by  that  I  love  so  —  "  Katie !  "  — 
your  lip  lifts  in  a  smile  —  you  believe  in  me,  you  know 
I  am  here.  Oh,  Chummie!  put  your  arms  round  me. 
I  was  going  to  write:  Let  us  shut  out  everybody.  But 
no,  it  is  not  that.  Only  we  shall  look  on  at  them  to- 
gether. My  brother,  you  know,  with  all  my  desire,  my 
will  is  weak.  To  do  things  —  even  to  write  absolutely 
for  myself  and  by  myself  —  is  awfully  hard  for  me. 
God  knows  why,  when  my  desire  is  so  strong.  But 
just  as  it  was  always  our  delight  to  sit  together  —  you 
remember?  —  and  to  talk  of  the  old  days,  down  to  the 
last  detail — the  last  feeling  —  looking  at  each  other 
and  by  our  eyes  expressing  when  speech  ended  how 
intimately  we  understood  each  other  —  so  now,  my 
dear  one,  we  shall  do  that  again.  You  know  how  un- 
happy I  have  been  lately.  I  almost  felt :  Perhaps  "  the 

new  man  "  will  not  live.  Perhaps  I  am  not  yet  risen 

But  now  I  do  not  doubt.  It  is  the  idea  (it  has  always 
been  there,  but  never  as  it  is  with  me  to-night)  that  I 
do  not  write  alone.  That  in  every  word  I  write  and 
every  place  I  visit  I  carry  you  with  me.  Indeed,  that 
might  be  the  motto  of  my  book.  There  are  daisies  on 
the  table  and  a  red  flower,  like  a  poppy,  shines 
through.  Of  daisies  I  will  write.  Of  the  dark.  Of  the 
wind  —  and  the  sun  and  the  mists.  Of  the  shadows. 
Ah !  of  all  that  you  loved  and  that  I  too  love  and  feel. 
To-night  it  is  made  plain.  However  often  I  write  and 

=  48  = 


"  The   Aloe" 

rewrite  I  shall  not  really  falter,  dearest,  and  the  book 
shall  be  written  and  ready. 

February  15.  I  have  broken  the  silence.  It  took  long. 
Did  I  fail  you  when  I  sat  reading?  Oh,  bear  with  me  a 
little.  I  will  be  better.  I  will  do  all,  all  that  we  would 
wish.  Love,  I  will  not  fail.  To-night  it  is  very  wild.  Do 
you  hear?  It  is  all  wind  and  sea.  You  feel  that  the 
world  is  blowing  like  a  feather,  springing  and  rocking 
in  the  air  like  a  balloon  from  Lindsay's.  I  seem  to  hear 
a  piano  sometimes,  but  that's  fancy.  How  loud  the 
wind  sounds !  If  I  write  every  day  faithfully  a  little 
record  of  how  I  have  kept  faith  with  you  —  that  is 
what  I  must  do.  Now  you  are  back  with  me.  You  are 
stepping  forward,  one  hand  in  your  pocket.  My 
brother,  my  little  boy  brother !  Your  thoughtful  eyes ! 
I  see  you  always  as  you  left  me.  I  saw  you  a  moment 
alone  —  by  yourself  —  and  quite  lost,  I  felt.  My  heart 
yearned  over  you  then.  Oh,  it  yearns  over  you  to-night 
and  now !  Did  you  cry !  I  always  felt :  He  never,  never 
must  be  unhappy.  Now  I  will  come  quite  close  to  you, 
take  your  hand,  and  we  shall  tell  this  story  to  each 
other. 

February  16. 1  found  "  The  Aloe  "  1  this  morning.  And 
when  I  had  re-read  it  I  knew  that  I  was  not  quite 
"  right "  yesterday.  No,  dearest,  it  was  not  just  the 

1  "  The  Aloe  "  was  the  original  version  of  Prelude.  It  exists  in  its 
original  and  longer  form,  and  will  be  published  with  the  remaining  frag- 
ments of  Katherine  Mansfield's  writings. 

=  49  = 


Jo urnal   i g 1 6 

spirit.  "  The  Aloe  "  is  right.  "  The  Aloe  "  is  lovely. 
It  simply  fascinates  me,  and  I  know  that  it  is  what 
you  would  wish  me  to  write.  And  now  I  know  what 
the  last  chapter  is.  It  is  your  birth  —  your  coming  in 
the  autumn.  You  in  Grandmother's  arms  under  the 
tree,  your  solemnity,  your  wonderful  beauty.  Your 
hands,  your  head  —  your  helplessness,  lying  on  the 
earth,  and,  above  all,  your  tremendous  solemnity. 
That  chapter  will  end  the  book.  The  next  book  will  be 
yours  and  mine.  And  you  must  mean  the  world  to 
Linda ;  and  before  ever  you  are  born  Kezia  must  play 
with  you  —  her  little  Bogey.  Oh,  Bogey  —  I  must 
hurry.  All  of  them  must  have  this  book.  It  is  good,  my 
treasure !  My  little  brother,  it  is  good,  and  it  is  what 
we  really  meant. 

February  17.  I  am  sad  to-night.  Perhaps  it  is  the  old 
forlorn  wind.  And  the  thought  of  you  spiritually  is 
not  enough  to-night.  I  want  you  by  me.  I  must  get 
deep  down  into  my  book,  for  then  I  shall  be  happy. 
Lose  myself,  lose  myself  to  find  you,  dearest.  Oh,  I 
want  this  book  to  be  written.  It  must  be  done.  It  must 
be  bound  and  wrapped  and  sent  to  New  Zealand.  I 
feel  that  with  all  my  soul.  ...  It  will  be. 

A  Recollection  of  Childhood 
Things  happened  so  simply  then,  without  prepara- 
tion and  without  any  shock.  They  let  me  go  into  my 
mother's  room  (I  remember  standing  on  tiptoe  and 
using  both  hands  to  turn  the  big  white  china  door- 

=  50  = 


A   Recollection   of   Childhood 

handle)  and  there  lay  my  mother  in  bed  with  her  arms 
along  the  sheet,  and  there  sat  my  grandmother  before 
the  fire  with  a  baby  in  a  flannel  across  her  knees.  My 
mother  paid  no  attention  to  me  at  all.  Perhaps  she 
was  asleep,  for  my  grandmother  nodded  and  said  in 
a  voice  scarcely  above  a  whisper,  "  Come  and  see  your 
little  sister."  I  tiptoed  to  her  voice  across  the  room, 
and  she  parted  the  flannel,  and  I  saw  a  little  round 
head  with  a  tuft  of  goldy  hair  on  it  and  a  big  face  with 
eyes  shut  —  white  as  snow.  "Is  it  alive?  "  I  asked. 
"  Of  course,"  said  grandmother.  "  Look  at  her  holding 
my  finger."  And  —  yes,  a  hand,  scarcely  bigger  than 
my  doll's,  in  a  frilled  sleeve,  was  wound  round  her 
finger.  "Do  you  like  her?"  said  my  grandmother. 
"Yes.  Is  she  going  to  play  with  the  doll's  house?  " 
"  By-and-by,"  said  the  grandmother,  and  I  felt  very 
pleased.  Mrs.  Heywood  had  just  given  us  the  doll's 
house.  It  was  a  beautiful  one  with  a  verandah  and  a 
balcony  and  a  door  that  opened  and  shut  and  two 
chimneys.  I  wanted  badly  to  show  it  to  someone  else. 

"  Her  name  is  Gwen,"  said  the  grandmother.  "  Kiss 
her." 

I  bent  down  and  kissed  the  little  goldy  tuft.  But  she 
took  no  notice.  She  lay  quite  still  with  her  eyes  shut. 

"  Now  go  and  kiss  mother,"  said  the  grandmother. 

But  mother  did  not  want  to  kiss  me.  Very  languid, 
leaning  against  the  pillows,  she  was  eating  some  sago. 
The  sun  shone  through  the  windows  and  winked  on 
the  brass  knobs  of  the  big  bed. 

After  that  grandmother  came  into  the  nursery  with 

=  5i  = 


Journal  igi6 

Gwen,  and  sat  in  front  of  the  nursery  fire  in  the  rock- 
ing chair  with  her.  Mag  and  Tadpole  were  away  stay- 
ing with  Aunt  Harriet,  and  they  had  gone  before  the 
new  doll's  house  arrived,  so  that  was  why  I  so  longed 
to  have  somebody  to  show  it  to.  I  had  gone  all  through 
it  myself,  from  the  kitchen  to  the  dining-room,  up  into 
the  bedrooms  with  the  doll's  lamp  on  the  table,  heaps 
and  heaps  of  times. 

"When  will  she  play  with  it?"  I  asked  grand- 
mother. 

"  By-and-by,  darling." 

It  was  spring.  Our  garden  was  full  of  big  white  lilies. 
I  used  to  run  out  and  sniff  them  and  come  in  again 
with  my  nose  all  yellow. 

"Can't  she  go  out?" 

At  last,  one  very  fine  day,  she  was  wrapped  in  the 
warm  shawl  and  grandmother  carried  her  into  the 
cherry  orchard,  and  walked  up  and  down  under  the  fall- 
ing cherry  flowers.  Grandmother  wore  a  grey  dress  with 
white  pansies  on  it.  The  doctor's  carriage  was  waiting 
at  the  door,  and  the  doctor's  little  dog,  Jackie,  rushed 
at  me  and  snapped  at  my  bare  legs.  When  we  went 
back  to  the  nursery  and  the  shawl  was  taken  away, 
little  white  petals  like  feathers  fell  out  of  the  folds. 
But  Gwen  did  not  look,  even  then.  She  lay  in  grand- 
mother's arms,  her  eyes  just  open  to  show  a  line  of 
blue,  her  face  very  white,  and  the  one  tuft  of  goldy  hair 
standing  up  on  her  head. 

All  day,  all  night  grandmother's  arms  were  full.  I 
had  no  lap  to  climb  into,  no  pillow  to  rest  against.  All 

-  52  = 


The  Doll's  House 


belonged  to  Gwen.  But  Gwen  did  not  notice  this ;  she 
never  put  up  her  hand  to  play  with  the  silver  brooch 
that  was  a  half-moon  with  five  little  owls  sitting  on 
it;  she  never  pulled  grandmother's  watch  from  her 
bodice  and  opened  the  back  by  herself  to  see  grand- 
father's hair ;  she  never  buried  her  head  close  to  smell 
the  lavender  water,  or  took  up  grandmother's  spectacle 
case  and  wondered  at  its  being  really  silver.  She  just 
lay  still  and  let  herself  be  rocked. 

Down  in  the  kitchen  one  day  old  Mrs.  M'Elvie 
came  to  the  door  and  asked  Bridget  about  the  poor 
little  mite,  and  Bridget  said,  "  Kep'  alive  on  bullock's 
blood  hotted  in  a  saucer  over  a  candle."  After  that  I 
felt  frightened  of  Gwen,  and  I  decided  that  even  when 
she  did  play  with  the  doll's  house  I  would  not  let  her 
go  upstairs  into  the  bedroom  —  only  downstairs,  and 
then  only  when  I  saw  she  could  look. 

Late  one  evening  I  sat  by  the  fire  on  my  little  carpet 
hassock  and  grandmother  rocked,  singing  the  song  she 
used  to  sing  to  me,  but  more  gently.  Suddenly  she 
stopped  and  I  looked  up.  Gwen  opened  her  eyes  and 
turned  her  little  round  head  to  the  fire  and  looked  and 
looked  at,  and  then — turned  her  eyes  up  to  the  face 
bending  over  her.  I  saw  her  tiny  body  stretch  out  and 
her  hands  flew  up,  and  "  Ah !  Ah !  Ah !  "  called  the 
grandmother. 

Bridget  dressed  me  next  morning.  When  I  went 
into  the  nursery  I  sniffed.  A  big  vase  of  the  white  lilies 
was  standing  on  the  table.  Grandmother  sat  in  her 
chair  to  one  side  with  Gwen  in  her  lap,  and  a  funny 


=  53  = 


Journal  igi6 

little  man  with  his  head  in  a  black  bag  was  standing 
behind  a  box  of  china  eggs. 

"  Now!  "  he  said,  and  I  saw  my  grandmother's  face 
change  as  she  bent  over  little  Gwen. 

"  Thank  you,"  said  the  man,  coming  out  of  the  bag. 
The  picture  was  hung  over  the  nursery  fire.  I  thought 
it  looked  very  nice.  The  doll's  house  was  in  it  —  veran- 
dah and  balcony  and  all.  Gran  held  me  up  to  kiss  my 
little  sister. 

Recollections  of  College 

J.'s  application  is  a  perpetual  reminder  to  me.  Why 
am  I  not  writing  too?  Why,  feeling  so  rich,  with  the 
greater  part  of  this  to  be  written  before  I  go  back  to 
England,  do  I  not  begin  ?  If  only  I  have  the  courage  to 
press  against  the  stiff  swollen  gate  all  that  lies  within 
is  mine;  why  do  I  linger  for  a  moment?  Because  I  am 
idle,  out  of  the  habit  of  work  and  spendthrift  beyond 
belief.  Really  it  is  idleness,  a  kind  of  immense  idleness 
—  hateful  and  disgraceful. 

I  was  thinking  yesterday  of  my  wasted,  wasted  early 
girlhood.  My  college  life,  which  is  such  a  vivid  and  de- 
tailed memory  in  one  way,  might  never  have  con- 
tained a  book  or  a  lecture.  I  lived  in  the  girls,  the  pro- 
fessor, the  big,  lovely  building,1  the  leaping  fires  in 
winter  and  the  abundant  flowers  in  summer.  The 
views  out  of  the  windows,  all  the  pattern  that  was  — 
weaving.  Nobody  saw  it,  I  felt,  as  I  did.  My  mind  was 
just  like  a  squirrel.  I  gathered  and  gathered  and  hid 

1  Queen's  College,  Harley  Street,  London. 

=  54  = 


College   Days 

away,  for  that  long  "  winter  "  when  I  should  redis- 
cover all  this  treasure  —  and  if  anybody  came  close 
I  scuttled  up  the  tallest,  darkest  tree  and  hid  in  the 
branches.  And  I  was  so  awfully  fascinated  in  watching 
Hall  Griffin  and  all  his  tricks  —  thinking  about  him 
as  he  sat  there,  his  private  life,  what  he  was  like  as  a 
man,  etc.,  etc.  (He  told  us  he  and  his  brother  once 
wrote  an  enormous  poem  called  the  Epic  of  the  Hall 
Griffins.)  Then  it  was  only  at  rare  intervals  that  some- 
thing flashed  through  all  this  busyness,  something 
about  Spenser's  Faery  Queen  or  Keats's  Isabella  and 
the  Pot  of  Basil,  and  those  flashes  were  always  when 
I  disagreed  flatly  with  H.G.  and  wrote  in  my  notes  — ■ 
This  man  is  a  fool.  And  Cramb,  wonderful  Cramb! 
The  figure  of  Cramb  was  enough,  he  was  "  history  "  to 
me.  Ageless  and  fiery,  eating  himself  up  again  and 
again,  very  fierce  at  what  he  had  seen,  but  going  a  bit 
blind  because  he  had  looked  so  long.  Cramb  striding 
up  and  down,  filled  me  up  to  the  brim.  I  couldn't  write 
down  Cramb's  thunder.  I  simply  wanted  to  sit  and 
hear  him.  Every  gesture,  every  stopping  of  his  walk, 
all  his  tones  and  looks  are  as  vivid  to  me  as  though  it 
were  yesterday  —  but  of  all  he  said  I  only  remember 
phrases  —  "  He  sat  there  and  his  wig  fell  off  — " 
"  Anne  Bullen,  a  lovely  pure  creature  stepping  out 
of  her  quiet  door  into  the  light  and  clamour,"  and 
looking  back  and  seeing  the  familiar  door  shut  upon 
her,  with  a  little  click  as  it  were,  —  final. 

But  what  coherent  account  could  I  give  of  the  his- 
tory of  English  Literature  ?  And  what  of  English  His- 

=  55  = 


Journal  1916 

tory?  None.  When  I  think  in  dates  and  times  the 
wrong  people  come  in  —  the  right  people  are  missing.1 
When  I  read  a  play  of  Shakespeare  I  want  to  be  able 
to  place  it  in  relation  to  what  came  before  and  what 
comes  after.  I  want  to  realize  what  England  was  like 
then,  at  least  a  little,  and  what  the  people  looked  like 
(but  even  as  I  write  I  feel  I  can  do  this,  at  least  the 
latter  thing),  but  when  a  man  is  mentioned,  even 
though  the  man  is  real,  I  don't  want  to  set  him  on  the 
right  hand  of  Sam  Johnson  when  he  ought  to  be  living 
under  Shakespeare's  shadow.  And  this  I  often  do. 

Since  I  came  here  I  have  been  very  interested  in  the 
Bible.  I  have  read  the  Bible  for  hours  on  end  and  I 
began  to  do  so  with  just  the  same  desire.  I  wanted  to 
know  if  Lot  followed  close  on  Noah  or  something  like 
that.  But  I  feel  so  bitterly  I  should  have  known  facts 
like  this :  they  ought  to  be  part  of  my  breathing.  Is 
there  another  grown  person  as  ignorant  as  I  ?  But  why 
didn't  I  listen  to  the  old  Principal  who  lectured  on 
Bible  History  twice  a  week  instead  of  staring  at  his 
face  that  was  very  round,  a  dark  red  colour  with  a 
kind  of  bloom  on  it  and  covered  all  over  with  little  red 
veins  with  endless  tiny  tributaries  that  ran  even  up  his 
forehead  and  were  lost  in  his  bushy  white  hair.  He  had 
tiny  hands,  too,  puffed  up,  purplish,  shining  under  the 
stained  flesh.  I  used  to  think,  looking  at  his  hands  — 

1  On  the  opposite  page  is  a  long  list  of  the  chief  figures  in  the  history 
of  English  Literature,  working  backwards  from  the  eighteenth  century. 
Evidently,  Katherine  Mansfield  had  been  trying  to  test  her  knowledge.  In 
the  final  result,  the  list,  though  it  is  much  corrected,  is  singularly  accurate. 

=  56- 


The   Principal 


he  will  have  a  stroke  and  die  of  paralysis.  .  .  .  They 
told  us  he  was  a  very  learned  man,  but  I  could  not  help 
seeing  him  in  a  double-breasted  frock-coat,  a  large 
pseudo-clerical  pith  helmet,  a  large  white  handker- 
chief falling  over  the  back  of  his  neck,  standing  and 
pointing  out  with  an  umbrella  a  probable  site  of  a 
probable  encampment  of  some  wandering  tribe,  to  his 
wife,  an  elderly  lady  with  a  threatening  heart  who  had 
to  go  everywhere  in  a  basket-chair  arranged  on  the 
back  of  a  donkey,  and  his  two  daughters,  in  thread 
gloves  and  sand  shoes  — smelling  faintly  of  some  anti- 
mosquito  mixture. 

As  he  lectured  I  used  to  sit,  building  his  house,  peo- 
pling it  —  filling  it  with  Americans,  ebony  and  heavy 
furniture  —  cupboards  like  tiny  domes  and  tables 
with  elephants'  legs  presented  to  him  by  grateful  mis- 
sionary friends I  never  came  into  contact  with  him 

but  once,  when  he  asked  any  young  lady  in  the  room 
to  hold  up  her  hand  if  she  had  been  chased  by  a  wild 
bull,  and  as  nobody  else  did  I  held  up  mine  (though 
of  course  I  hadn't).  "  Ah,"  he  said,  "  I  am  afraid  you 
do  not  count.  You  are  a  little  savage  from  New  Zea- 
land "  —  which  was  a  trifle  exacting,  for  it  must  be 
the  rarest  thing  to  be  chased  by  a  wild  bull  up  and 
down  Harley  Street,  Wimpole  Street,  Welbeck  Street, 
Queen  Anne,  round  and  round  Cavendish  Square.  .  .  . 

And  why  didn't  I  learn  French  with  M.  Huguenot? 
What  an  opportunity  missed!  What  has  it  not  cost 
me !  He  lectured  in  a  big  narrow  room  that  was  painted 
all  over  —  the  walls,  door,  and  window-frames,  a  grey 


=  57  = 


Journal  igi6 

shade  of  mignonette  green.  The  ceiling  was  white,  and 
just  below  it  there  was  a  frieze  of  long  looped  chains 
of  white  flowers.  On  either  side  of  the  marble  mantel- 
piece a  naked  small  boy  staggered  under  a  big  platter 
of  grapes  that  he  held  above  his  head.  Below  the  win- 
dows, far  below  there  was  a  stable  court  paved  in  cob- 
ble stones,  and  one  could  hear  the  faint  clatter  of  car- 
riages coming  out  or  in,  the  noise  of  water  gushing  out 
of  a  pump  into  a  big  pail  —  some  youth,  clumping 
about  and  whistling.  The  room  was  never  very  light, 
and  in  summer  M.H.  liked  the  blinds  to  be  drawn 
half-way  down  the  window.  .  .  .  He  was  a  little  fat 
man. 

The  old  man  could  not  get  over  the  fact  that  he  was 
still  strong  enough  to  lift  such  a  lump  of  a  boy.  He 
wanted  to  do  it  again  and  again,  and  even  when  the 
little  boy  was  awfully  tired  of  the  game  the  old  man 
kept  putting  out  his  arms  and  smiling  foolishly  and 
trying  to  lift  him  still  higher.  He  even  tried  with  one 
arm.  .  . . 

Saunders  Lane 
March  12.  Our  house  in  Tinakori  Road  stood  far  back 
from  the  road.  It  was  a  big,  white-painted  square 
house  with  a  slender  pillared  verandah  and  balcony 
running  all  the  way  round  it.  In  the  front  from  the 
verandah  edge  the  garden  sloped  away  in  terraces  and 
flights  of  concrete  steps — down  —  until  you  reached 
the  stone  wall  covered  with  nasturtiums  that  had  three 
gates  let  into  it  —  the  visitors'  gate,  the  Tradesman's 

=  58  = 


Tinakori  Road 


gate,  and  a  huge  pair  of  old  iron  gates  that  were  never 
used  and  clashed  and  clamoured  when  Bogey  and  I 
tried  to  swing  on  them. 

Tinakori  Road  was  not  fashionable;  it  was  very 
mixed.  Of  course  there  were  some  good  houses  in  it, 
old  ones,  like  ours  for  instance,  hidden  away  in  wildish 
gardens,  and  there  was  no  doubt  that  land  there  would 
become  extremely  valuable,  as  Father  said,  if  one 
bought  enough  and  hung  on. 

It  was  high,  it  was  healthy ;  the  sun  poured  in  all 
the  windows  all  day  long,  and  once  we  had  a  decent 
tramway  service,  as  Father  argued. .  .  . 

But  it  was  a  little  trying  to  have  one's  own  washer- 
woman living  next  door  who  would  persist  in  attempt- 
ing to  talk  to  Mother  over  the  fence,  and  then,  just 
beyond  her  *  hovel,'  as  Mother  called  it,  there  lived  an 
old  man  who  burned  leather  in  his  back  yard  whenever 
the  wind  blew  our  way.  And  further  along  there  lived 
an  endless  family  of  halfcastes  who  appeared  to  have 
planted  their  garden  with  empty  jam  tins  and  old 
saucepans  and  black  iron  kettles  without  lids.  And 
then  just  opposite  our  house  there  was  a  paling  fence 
and  below  the  paling  fence  in  a  hollow,  squeezed  in 
almost  under  the  fold  of  a  huge  gorse-covered  hill, 
was  Saunder's  Lane. 

[K.M.  seems  to  have  made  this  the  scene  of  her  story,  The 
Garden  Party.] 

March.  Jinnie  Moore  was  awfully  good  at  elocution. 
Was  she  better  than  I?  I  could  make  the  girls  cry 

=  59  = 


Journal  iqi6 

when  I  read  Dickens  in  the  sewing  class,  and  she 
couldn't.  But  then  she  never  tried  to.  She  didn't 
care  for  Dickens;  she  liked  something  about  horses 
and  tramps  and  shipwrecks  and  prairie  fires  — 
they  were  her  style,  her  reckless,  red  haired,  dashing 
style. 

[The  following  is  an  unposted  letter  written  to  Frederick 
Goodyear,  a  close  friend  of  both  Katherine  Mansfield  and  my- 
self. He  was  at  this  time  serving  in  France  in  the  Meteorologi- 
cal section  of  the  Royal  Engineers.  A  few  months  afterwards 
he  applied  for  a  commission  in  an  infantry  regiment  in  order 
to  go  to  the  fighting  line.  There  he  was  killed,  in  May  191 7. 
It  should  be  put  on  record  that  no  single  one  of  Katherine 
Mansfield's  friends  who  went  to  the  war  returned  alive  from 
it.  This'  will  explain  the  profound  and  ineradicable  impression 
made  upon  her  by  the  war,  an  impression  which  found  utter- 
ance in  the  last  year  of  her  life  in  the  story,  "  The  Fly." 

Frederick  Goodyear,  who  was  three  years  my  senior  at 
Brasenose,  was  certainly  the  most  brilliant  undergraduate  at 
Oxford  in  my  time.  He  was  the  first  of  my  friends  to  be  intro- 
duced to  Katherine  Mansfield  after  I  had  made  her  acquaint- 
ance, and  he  became  her  friend.  He  accompanied  us  to  Paris 
on  our  unfortunate  expedition  in  the  winter  of  1913.  His  letters 
and  literary  remains,  with  a  biographical  memoir  by  Mr.  F.  W. 
Leith-Ross,  were  published  in  1920.  The  concluding  words  of 
his  letter  to  Katherine  Mansfield,  to  which  hers  was  a  reply, 
are  these: 

"The  fact  is  I'm  simply  in  a  chronic  surly  temper  with  life: 
and  Nothing,  if  I  can  possibly  help  it,  shall  make  me  emerge. 

We  want  a  definition.  If  love  is  only  love  when  it  is  resistless, 
I  don't  love  you.  But  if  it  is  a  relative  emotion,  I  do. 

Personally,  I  think  everything  everywhere  is  bunkum. 

Fredk.  Goodyear."] 

=  60  = 


English  Food 


Sunday.  Villa  Pauline,  Bandol  (Far).  Mr.  F.G. — 
Never  did  cowcumber  lie  more  heavy  on  a  female's 
buzzum  than  your  curdling  effugion  which  I  have  read 
twice  and  won't  again  if  horses  drag  me.  But  I  keep 
wondering,  and  can't  for  the  life  of  me  think,  whatever 
there  was  in  mine  to  so  importantly  disturb  you. 
(Henry  James  is  dead.  Did  you  know?)  I  did  not, 
swayed  by  a  resistless  passion,  say  that  I  loved  you. 
Nevertheless  I  am  prepared  to  say  it  again  looking  at 
this  pound  of  onions  that  hangs  in  a  string  kit  from  a 
saucepan  nail.  But  why  should  you  write  to  me  as 
though  I'd  got  into  the  family  way  and  driven  round 
to  you  in  a  hansom  cab  to  ask  you  to  make  a  respecta- 
ble woman  of  me?  Yes,  you're  bad  tempered,  sus- 
picious, and  surly.  And  if  you  think  I  flung  my  bonnet 
over  you  as  a  possible  mill,  my  lad,  you're  mis- 
took. 

In  fact,  now  I  come  to  ponder  on  your  last  letter  I 
don't  believe  you  want  to  write  to  me  at  all  and  I'm 
hanged  if  I'll  shoot  arrows  in  the  air.  But  perhaps  that 
is  temper  on  my  part;  it  is  certainly  pure  stomach. 
I'm  so  hungry,  simply  empty,  and  seeing  in  my  mind's 
eye  just  now  a  sirloin  of  beef,  well  browned  with 
plenty  of  gravy  and  horseradish  sauce  and  baked  po- 
tatoes, I  nearly  sobbed.  There's  nothing  here  to  eat 
except  omelettes  and  oranges  and  onions.  It's  a  cold, 
sunny  windy  day  —  the  kind  of  day  when  you  want 
a  tremendous  feed  for  lunch  and  an  armchair  in  front 
of  the  fire  to  boa-constrict  in  afterwards.  I  feel  senti- 
mental about  England  now  —  English  food,  decent 

=  61  = 


Journal  I g  16 

English  waste!  How  much  better  than  these  thrifty 
French,  whose  flower  gardens  are  nothing  but  poten- 
tial salad  bowls.  There's  not  a  leaf  in  France  that  you 
can't  '  faire  une  infusion  avec,'  not  a  blade  that  isn't 
1  bon  pour  la  cuisine.'  By  God,  I'd  like  to  buy  a  pound 
of  the  best  butter,  put  it  on  the  window  sill  and  watch 
it  melt  to  spite  'em.  They  are  a  stingy  uncomfortable 
crew  for  all  their  lively  scrapings.  .  .  .  For  instance, 
their  houses — what  appalling  furniture  —  and  never 
one  comfortable  chair.  If  you  want  to  talk  the  only 
possible  thing  to  do  is  to  go  to  bed.  It's  a  case  of  either 
standing  on  your  feet  or  lying  in  comfort  under  a 
puffed-up  eiderdown.  I  quite  understand  the  reason 
for  what  is  called  French  moral  laxity.  You're  simply 
forced  into  bed  —  no  matter  with  whom.  There's  no 
other  place  for  you.  Supposing  a  young  man  comes  to 
see  about  the  electric  light  and  will  go  on  talking  and 
pointing  to  the  ceiling  —  or  a  friend  drops  in  to  tea 
and  asks  you  if  you  believe  in  Absolute  Evil.  How  can 
you  give  your  mind  to  these  things  when  you're  sitting 
on  four  knobs  and  a  square  inch  of  cane?  How  much 
better  to  lie  snug  and  give  yourself  up  to  it. 

Later 
Now  I've  eaten  one  of  the  omelettes  and  one  of  the 
oranges.  The  sun  has  gone  in;  it's  beginning  to  thun- 
der. There's  a  little  bird  on  a  tree  outside  this  window 
not  so  much  singing  as  sharpening  a  note.  He's  getting 
a  very  fine  point  on  it ;  I  expect  you  would  know  his 

=  62  = 


"The  Idiot" 


name.  .  .  .  Write  to  me  again  when  everything  is  not 
too  bunkum. 
Good-bye  for  now ! 

With  my  strictly  relative  love 

K.M. 

Notes  on  Dostoevsky 
March.     Nastasya     Filipovna     Barashkov     ("  The 
Idiot"). 

Page  7.  She  is  first  mentioned  by  Rogozhin  in  the 
train  and  she  is  immediately  *  recognised '  by  a  man 
with  a  red  nose  and  a  pimpled  face  who  '  knows  all 
about  her.' 

"Armance  and  Coralie  and  Princess  Patsy  and 
Nastasya  Filipovna." 

"  We'll  go  and  see  Nastasya  Filipovna."  Prophetic 
words. 

Page  9.  Why  did  she  accept  the  ear-rings  from  a 
man  she  had  never  seen?  She  was  not  greedy  for 
jewels.  She  had  plenty,  and  she  was  extremely  particu- 
lar in  her  conduct  towards  other  men.  Is  that  a  kind 
of  Russian  custom?  To  accept  the  ear-rings  as  a  kind 
of  recognition  of  her  beauty  ? 

Pages  26,  27.  The  Portrait :  "  Dark  and  deep,  pas- 
sionate and  disdainful." 

Page  33.  "  Her  face  is  cheerful,  but  she  has  passed 
through  terrible  suffering,  hasn't  she?  .  .  .  It's  a  proud 
face,  awfully  proud,  but  I  don't  know  whether  she  is 
good  hearted.  Ah!  If  she  were!  That  would  redeem 
it  all." 


=  63  = 


Journal   igi6 


Page  37.  The  Story  of  Nastasya.  That  change  in  her 
when  she  appears  in  Petersburg  —  her  knowledge,  al- 
most '  technical/  of  how  things  are  done  in  the  world, 
is  not  at  all  impossible.  With  such  women  it  seems  to 
be  a  kind  of  instinct.  (Maata  was  just  the  same.  She 
simply  knew  these  things  from  nowhere.)  Her  action, 
that  Dostoevsky  says  is  '  from  spite,'  is  to  shew  her 
power,  and  that  when  he  has  jerked  out  the  weapon 
with  which  he  wounded  her  she  feels  the  dreadful 
smart. 

Having  read  the  whole  of  "  The  Idiot "  through 
again,  and  fairly  carefully,  I  feel  slightly  more  be- 
wildered than  I  did  before  as  regards  Nastasya  Fili- 
povna's  character.  She  is  really  not  well  done.  She  is 
badly  done.  And  there  grows  up  as  one  reads  on  a 
kind  of  irritation,  a  balked  fascination,  which  almost 
succeeds  finally  in  blotting  out  those  first  and  really 
marvellous  '  impressions  '  of  her.  What  was  Dostoev- 
sky really  aiming  at? 

Shatov  and  his  Wife  ("  The  Possessed  ") 
There  is  something  awfully  significant  about  the 
attitude  of  Shatov  to  his  wife,  and  it  is  amazing  how, 
when  Dostoevsky  at  last  turns  a  soft  but  penetrating 
and  full  light  upon  him,  how  we  have  managed  to 
gather  a  great  deal  of  knowledge  of  his  character  from 
the  former  vague  side-lights  and  shadowy  impressions. 
He  is  just  what  we  thought  him ;  he  behaves  just  as  we 
would  expect  him  to  do.  There  is  all  that  crudity  and 
what  you  might  call  *  shock-headedness  '  in  his  nature 

=  64  = 


The  Possessed" 


—  and  it  is  wonderfully  tragic  that  he  who  is  so  soon 
to  be  destroyed  himself  should  suddenly  realise —  and 
through  a  third  person  —  through  a  little  squealing 
baby  —  the  miracle  just  being  alive  is. 

Every  time  I  read  those  chapters  about  his  new- 
born happiness  I  cherish  a  kind  of  tiny  hope  that  this 
time  he  will  escape  —  he  will  be  warned,  he  won't  die. 

How  did  Dostoevsky  know  about  that  extraordi- 
nary vindictive  feeling,  that  relish  for  little  laughter 

—  that  comes  over  women  in  pain?  It  is  a  very  secret 
thing,  but  it's  profound,  profound.  They  don't  want 
to  spare  the  one  whom  they  love.  If  that  one  loves  them 
with  a  kind  of  blind  devotion  as  Shatov  did  Marie, 
they  long  to  torment  him,  and  this  tormenting  gives 
them  real  positive  relief.  Does  this  resemble  in  any 
way  the  tormenting  that  one  observes  so  often  in  his 
affairs  of  passion?  Are  his  women  ever  happy  when 
they  torment  their  lovers?  No,  they  too  are  in  the 
agony  of  labour.  They  are  giving  birth  to  their  new 
selves.  And  they  never  believe  in  their  deliverance. 

[After  our  return  from  Bandol  in  April  1916,  we  lived  at 
Higher  Tregerthen  in  North  Cornwall,  then  at  Mylor  in  South 
Cornwall.  In  September  19 16  we  came  to  London.] 

[November.  3  Gozver  Street.~]  It  is  so  strange!  I  am 
suddenly  back  again,  coming  into  my  room  and  desir- 
ing to  write,  Knock,  goes  Miss  Chapman  at  the  door. 
A  man  has  come  to  clean  the  windows.  I  might  have 
known  it ! 
And  so  death  claims  us.  I  am  sure  that  just  at  that 

=  65  = 


Journal   1916 

final  moment  a  knock  will  come  and  Somebody  Else 
will  come  to  '  clean  the  windows.' 

B.  has  given  me  his  fountain  pen.  The  room  is  full 
of  smoke  to-night,  the  gas  bubbles  as  if  the  pipes  were 
full  of  water.  It's  very  quiet.  I  have  rather  a  cold,  but 
I  feel  absolutely  alive  after  my  experience  of  this 
afternoon. 

December  8.  I  thought  and  thought  this  morning  but 
to  not  much  avail.  I  can't  think  why,  but  my  wit  seems 
to  be  nearly  deserting  me  when  I  want  to  get  down  to 
earth.  I  am  all  right  —  sky-high.  And  even  in  my 
brain,  in  my  head,  I  can  think  and  act  and  write  won- 
ders —  wonders ;  but  the  moment  I  really  try  to  put 
them  down  I  fail  miserably. 


Gar  sing  ton  ,   igi6 


igij 

[In  the  spring  of  19 17  Katherine  Mansfield  took  a  studio 
for  herself  in  Church  Street,  Chelsea,  while  I  had  rooms  near  by 
in  Redcliffe  Road.] 

Summer 
"  Et  pourtant,  il  faut  s'habituer  a  vivre, 
Meme  seul,  meme  triste,  indifferent  et  las, 
Car,  6  ma  vision  troublante,  n'es-tu  pas 
Un  mirage  incessant  trop  difficile  a  suivre?" 

[The  stories  referred  to  in  the  following  note  were,  so  far  as 
I  know,  never  finished.  All  that  remains  of  them  is  a  page  of 
MS.  from  "Geneva."  I  do  not  understand  the  whole  of  the 
note,  which  is  written  in  the  compressed  and  cryptic  manner 
Katherine  Mansfield  sometimes  used  in  sketching  out  stories. 
The  little  boy's  remark  about  the  teapot  and  the  kitten  appears 
in  Mr.  Reginald  Peacock's  Day,  "  Bliss,"  p.  205.] 

Tchehov  makes  me  feel  that  this  longing  to  write 
stories  of  such  uneven  length  is  quite  justified.  Geneva 
is  a  long  story,  and  Hamilton  is  very  short,  and  this 
ought  to  be  written  to  my  brother  really,  and  another 
about  the  life  in  New  Zealand.  Then  there  is  Bavaria. 
"  Ich  Hebe  Dich,  Ich  Hebe  Dich,"  floating  out  on  the 
air  . . .  and  then  there  is  Paris.  God !  When  shall  I  write 
all  these  things  and  how? 

Is  that  all?  Can  that  be  all?  That  is  not  what  I 
meant  at  all. 

=  67  = 


Journal   1917 

Tchehov  is  quite  right  about  women;  yes,  he  is 
quite  right.  These  fairies  in  black  and  silver  —  "  and 
then,  tearing  down  the  road,  her  long  brown  fur  blow- 
ing behind  her,  brushing  the  leaves  with  her  trailing 
skirt,  crying:  of  course  he  was  awfully  sorry  that  she 
did  not  get  satisfaction,  just  as  he  would  have  been 
awfully  sorry  if  she  hadn't  liked  strawberries  and 
cream  —  Friday  —  Friday  —  he  could  not  get  the 
word  out  of  his  head  . . .  and  before  him  stood  the  little 
man  with  his  hair  neatly  combed,  saying:  ' Please 
take  something  to  eat ! '  "  But  I  cannot  believe  that  at 
this  stage  of  the  proceedings  something  pretty  ex- 
traordinary did  not  happen.  I  sat  with  my  back  to  no- 
one. 

T.F. ;  M.F.  This  woman  I  know  very  well  —  vain, 
eager,  beautiful,  desenchantee,  an  '  actress.' 
"  I  can  put  a  little  child's  bed  into  the  corner." 
"  Which  do  you  like  best,  Daddie,  —  cats  or  dogs  ?  " 
"  Well,  I  think  I  like  dogs  best,  old  chap." 
"  I  don't:  I'd  like  to  have  a  kitten  about  as  big  as  a 
little  tea-pot." 

One  character,  of  the  man,  rather  beats  me.  I  want 
a  very  quiet  man,  absorbed  in  his  work,  who,  once  he 
realised  —  really  realised  —  that  his  wife  had  married 
him  for  her  own  ends,  had  no  more  to  do  with  her,  but 
still  loved  her  and  adored  the  child.  It  is  all  a  bit  dim- 
cult  to  write,  but  awfully  fascinating,  and  should  not 
be  at  too  great  length. 

Does  this  pen  write?  Oh,  I  do  hope  so.  For  it's 
really  beastly  to  have  a  pen  that  doesn't.  And  then  a 

=  68  = 


My   People 


clergyman  goes  up  to  him  and  says  he  has  lost  the  tails 
off  his  sheep.  Well,  it's  a  comic!  You  see? 

August  21.  141  a  Church  St.,  Chelsea.  I  came  home 
this  afternoon  and  F.  came  in.  I  was  standing  in  the 
studio,  someone  whistled  on  the  path.  It  was  he.  I 
went  out  and  bought  some  milk  and  honey  and  Veda 
bread.  By  and  by  we  sat  down  and  had  tea  and  talk. 
This  man  is  in  many  ways  extraordinarily  like  me.  I 
like  him  so  much ;  I  feel  so  honest  with  him  that  it's 
simply  one  of  my  real  joys,  one  of  the  real  joys  of  my 
life,  to  have  him  come  and  talk  and  be  with  me.  I  did 
not  realise,  until  he  was  here  and  we  ate  together,  how 
much  I  was  really  at  home  with  him.  A  real  under- 
standing. We  might  have  spoken  a  different  language 
—  returned  from  a  far  country.  I  just  felt  all  was  well, 
and  we  understood  each  other.  Just  that.  And  there 
was  *  ease  '  between  us.  There  is  a  division :  people  who 
are  my  people,  people  who  are  not  my  people.  He  is 
mine.  I  gave  him  for  a  pledge  my  little  puddock.1 

When  we  walked  out  I  saw  the  sky  again  after  all 
the  day's  blindness  —  little  cloud  and  big  clouds.  We 
said  goodJbye  at  Vinden's.  That  is  all.  But  I  wanted 
to  make  a  note  of  it. 

I.  They  meet  and  just  touch. 
II.  They  come  together  and  part. 

III.  They  are  separated  and  meet  again. 

IV.  They  realise  their  tie. 

1  A  brass   frog  which   was   one   of   Katherine    Mansfield's  treasure 
possessions. 

=  69  = 


Journal   1917 


Alors,  je  pars 

It  is  astonishing  how  violently  a  big  branch  shakes 
when  a  silly  little  bird  has  left  it.  I  expect  the  bird 
knows  it  and  feels  immensely  arrogant.  The  way  he 
went  on,  my  dear,  when  I  said  I  was  going  to  leave 
him.  He  was  quite  desperate.  But  now  the  branch  is 
quiet  again.  Not  a  bud  has  fallen,  not  a  twig  has 
snapped.  It  stands  up  in  the  bright  air,  steady  and 
firm,  and  thanks  the  Lord  that  it  has  got  its  evenings 
to  itself  again. 

A  Shilling  gone  Bust 

A  knock  at  the  door.  Two  sisters  of  Nazareth  — 
one,  rather  pretty  and  meek,  in  the  background,  at- 
tending ;  the  other  very  voluble  and  fluent,  her  hands 
in  her  sleeves.  When  she  smiled,  showing  her  pale  gums 
and  big  discoloured  teeth  I  decided  that  I  had  quite 
got  over  my  sentimental  feeling  about  nuns.  She  was 
collecting  for  their  home  for  little  children.  All  sorts 
of  little  children  were  admitted  except  those  suffering 
from  infectious  diseases  or  subject  to  fits.  I  wondered 
what  would  happen  if  one  developed  fits  after  admit- 
tance and  decided  that  I  should  have  the  most  realistic 
fit  the  moment  the  Nazarene  door  shut  on  me.  ...  I 
remember  you  well  from  last  year,  said  the  nun.  But 
I  wasn't  here  last  year.  Ah,  people  change  so  quickly, 
said  she.  Yes,  but  perhaps  their  faces  don't,  said  I, 
seriously,  giving  her  the  shilling  I  was  just  going  to 
put  into  the  gas  meter.  I  wish  I  had  put  it  into  the  gas 
meter  five  minutes  before.  .  .  . 

=  70  = 


Living  Alone 


Living  Alone 

Even  if  I  should,  by  some  awful  chance,  find  a  hair 
upon  my  bread  and  honey  —  at  any  rate  it  is  my  own 
hair. 

Beware  of  the  Rain! 

Late  in  the  evening,  after  you  have  cleared  away 
your  supper,  blown  the  crumbs  out  of  the  book  that 
you  were  reading,  lighted  the  lamp  and  curled  up  in 
front  of  the  fire,  that  is  the  moment  to  beware  of  the 
rain. 

E.  M.  Forster 

Putting  my  weakest  books  to  the  wall  last  night  I 
came  across  a  copy  of  "  Howard's  End "  and  had  a 
look  into  it.  But  it's  not  good  enough.  E.  M.  Forster 
never  gets  any  further  than  warming  the  teapot.  He's 
a  rare  fine  hand  at  that.  Feel  this  teapot.  Is  it  not 
beautifully  warm  ?  Yes,  but  there  ain't  going  to  be  no 
tea. 

Love  and  Mushrooms 

If  only  one  could  tell  true  love  from  false  love  as 
one  can  tell  mushrooms  from  toadstools.  With  mush- 
rooms it  is  so  simple  - —  you  salt  them  well,  put  them 
aside  and  have  patience.  But  with  love,  you  have  no 
sooner  lighted  on  anything  that  bears  even  the  re- 
motest resemblance  to  it  than  you  are  perfectly  cer- 
tain it  is  not  only  a  genuine  specimen,  but  perhaps 
the  only  genuine  mushroom  ungathered.  It  takes  a 
dreadful  number  of  toadstools  to  make  you  realise 
that  life  is  not  one  long  mushroom. 

=  71  - 


Journal  1917 


Babies  and  the  dear  old  Queen 

Whenever  I  see  babies  in  arms  I  am  struck  again 
by  their  resemblance  to  the  dear  old  Queen.  They  have 
just  the  same  air  of  false  resignation,  the  same  mourn- 
ful, regal  plumpness.  If  only  her  Majesty  had  deigned 
to  be  photographed  in  a  white  woollen  bonnet  with  a 
little  frill  of  eiderdown  round  it  there'd  be  no  telling 
the  difference.  Especially  if  she  could  have  been  per- 
suaded to  sit  on  Grandpa  Gladstone's  knee  for  the 
occasion. 

Dreams  and  Rhubarb 

My  sticks  of  rhubarb  were  wrapped  up  in  a  copy  of 
the  Star  containing  Lloyd  George's  last,  more  than 
eloquent  speech.  As  I  snipped  up  the  rhubarb  my  eye 
fell,  was  fixed  and  fastened,  on  that  sentence  wherein 
he  tells  us  that  we  have  grasped  our  niblick  and  struck 
out  for  the  open  course.  Pray  Heaven  there  is  some 
faithful  soul  ever  present  with  a  basket  to  catch  these 
tender  blossoms  as  they  fall.  Ah,  God!  it  is  a  dreadful 
thought  that  these  immortal  words  should  go  down 
into  the  dreamless  dust  uncherished.  I  loved  to  think, 
as  I  put  the  rhubarb  into  the  saucepan,  that  years 
hence  —  P.G.  many  many  years  hence  —  when  in  the 
fullness  of  time,  full  of  ripeness  and  wisdom,  the  Al- 
mighty sees  fit  to  gather  him  into  His  bosom,  some 
gentle  stonecutter  living  his  quiet  life  in  the  little  vil- 
lage that  had  known  great  David  as  a  child  would  take 
a  piece  of  fair  white  marble  and  engrave  upon  it  two 
niblicks  crossed  and  underneath : 


=  72  = 


igi7 


Mr.  Lloyd   George 


In  the  hour  of  England's  most  imminent  -peril  he 
grasped  his  Niblick  and  struck  out  for  the  Open 
Course. 

But  what  does  rather  worry  me,  I  thought,  turning 
the  gas  down  to  a  pinch  as  the  rhubarb  began  to  boil, 
is  how  these  mighty  words  are  to  be  translated  so  that 
our  allies  may  taste  the  full  flavour  of  them.  Those 
crowds  of  patient  Russians,  waiting  in  the  snow,  per- 
haps, to  have  the  speech  read  aloud  to  them  —  what 
dreadful  weapon  will  it  present  to  their  imagination  ? 
Unless  The  Daily  News  suggests  to  Mr.  Ransome  that 
he  walk  down  the  Nevsky  Prospekt  with  a  niblick  in- 
stead of  an  umbrella  for  all  the  world  to  see.  And  the 
French  —  what  espece  de  Niblickisme  will  they  make 
of  it.  Shall  we  read  in  the  French  papers  next  week  of 
someone  qui  manque  de  niblick.  Or  that  "  Au  milieu 
de  ces  evenements  si  graves  ce  qu'il  nous  faut  c'est  du 
courage,  de  I'espoir  et  du  niblick  le  plus  jerme.  .  ,  ." 
I  wondered,  taking  off  the  rhubarb. 

A  Victorian  Idyll 
Yesterday  Matilda  Mason 

In  the  Parlour  by  herself 
Broke  a  Handsome  China  Basin 

Placed  upon  the  Mantelshelf. 

You  picture  Matilda  in  a  little  check  dress,  puce 
shoulder  ties,  muslin  pantalettes,  black  sandals,  and 
a  pound  of  rich  glossy  curls  held  in  place  by  a  velvet 
band.  She  tip-toes  about  the  parlour,  among  the  what- 
nots and  antimacassars  and  embroidery  frames  and 

=  73  = 


Journal   IQI7 


Mamma's  workbox  with  the  ivory  fittings,  and  Papa's 
music  stand  with  the  pearl  studded  flute  lying  across 
it.  .  .  .  How  did  she  come  to  be  in  the  parlour  by  her- 
self? Rash,  foolish  child!  Why  was  she  not  sitting 
upon  a  bead  hassock  in  the  nursery  conning  over  one 
of  those  amiable  little  tunes  for  infants  from  one  and 
a  half  to  three  years  (Charles :  Pray,  dear  papa !  what 
is  the  Solar  System?  Papa:  Wipe  your  nose,  Charles, 
and  I  will  tell  you)  or  embroidering  God  is  Love  in  red 
upon  a  nightdress  case  for  her  dear  Mamma  ? 

She  had  parted  her  Papa's  Picadilly  weepers,  had 
been  strained  to  his  flashing  bosom  before  he  dashed 
off  to  that  mysterious  place,  the  City,  where  ladies 
feared  to  tread ;  her  Mamma,  having  seen  the  doctor's 
gig  draw  up  at  number  twelve,  had  put  on  her  second 
best  pair  of  jet  ear-rings,  wrapped  herself  in  her  sec- 
ond best  cashmere  shawl  and  taken  a  flask  of  eau-de- 
cologne.  .  . . 


ipiS 

[In  November  1917  K.M.  caught  a  chill,  which  developed 
into  pleurisy.  When  she  had  partly  recovered  the  doctor  advised 
her  to  go  to  the  South  of  France. 

She  was  overjoyed  at  the  prospect.  She  did  not  realise,  neither 
did  anybody  warn  her,  that  during  the  two  years  since  she  was 
last  in  Bandol  conditions  in  France  had  utterly  changed.  Rail- 
way travelling  was  difficult,  food  bad.  And,  perhaps  most  seri- 
ous of  all,  she  would  not  admit  that  she  was  gravely  ill.  Her 
courage  and  confidence  deceived  herself  as  well  as  her  friends. 
She  persuaded  herself  and  them  that  she  was  the  one  to  be 
envied  for  being  sent  into  the  sun. 

After  an  appalling  journey,  described  in  one  of  her  letters, 
she  reached  Bandol  in  January  1918  to  find  that  the  little  Medi- 
terranean town  she  remembered  so  beautiful  was  now  dirty  and 
neglected.  From  the  moment  she  arrived  she  was  seriously  ill 
and  quite  alone,  until  in  February  her  friend,  L.M.,  managed 
to  get  to  her.] 

[January.  Bandol. ]  When  I  am  sitting  above  the  rocks 
near  the  edge  of  the  sea,  I  always  fancy  that  I  hear 
above  the  plash  of  the  water  the  voice  of  two  people 
talking  somewhere  I  know  not  what.  And  the  talking 
is  always  broken  by  something  which  is  neither  laugh- 
ter nor  sobbing,  but  a  low  thrilling  sound  which  might 
be  either  and  is  a  part  of  both. 

But  Lord !  Lord !  how  I  do  hate  the  French. 

Mademoiselle  complains  that  she  has  the  pieds 
glaces. 

=  75  = 


Journal  igi8 

"  Then  why  do  you  wear  such  pretty  stockings  and 
shoes,  Mademoiselle?  "  leers  Monsieur. 

"  Eh  —  o,  la  —  c'est  la  mode !  " 

And  the  fool  grins,  well  content  with  the  idiot  an- 
swer. 

How  immensely  easier  it  is  to  attack  an  insect  that 
is  running  away  from  you  rather  than  one  that  is 
running  towards  you. 

Note:  A  muff  like  a  hard  nut.  (Mouse  in  Je  ne 
farle  pas.) 

(February.)  What  happens  is  that  I  come  in  abso- 
lutely exhausted,  lie  down,  sit  up  and  sit  in  a  daze  of 
fatigue  —  a  horrible  state  —  until  7  o'clock.  I  can 
barely  walk  —  can't  think,  don't  dare  to  go  to  sleep 
because  if  I  do  I  know  I'll  lie  awake  through  the 
night,  and  that  is  my  horror.  Oh,  for  a  sofa  or  a  very 
comfortable  armchair — this  is  always  the  longing  at 
the  back  of  my  mind ;  and  except  for  that  and  a  feeling 
of  despair  at  wasting  the  time  I  am  simply  a  blank. 
The  pain  continues  in  my  left  shoulder  and  is  the 
.  That  adds,  of  course,  for  finally  it  becomes  in- 
tolerable and  drives  me  to  lie  on  the  bed  covered  over 
to  support  it.  But  these  are,  Hard  Lines. 

Verses  Writ  in  a  Foreign  Bed 
Almighty  Father  of  All  and  Most  Celestial  Giver 

Who  has  granted  to  us  thy  children  a  heart  and  lungs  and 
a  liver; 
If  upon  me  should  descend  thy  beautiful  gift  of  tongues 
Incline  not  thine  Omnipotent  ear  to  my  remarks  on  lungs. 

=  76  = 


Consumption 


"  Toujours  fatiguee,  Madame?  " 

"  Oui,  toujours  fatiguee." 

"  Je  ne  me  leve  pas,  Victorine;  et  le  courier?  " 

Victorine  smiles  meaningly,  "  Pas  encore  passe." 

February  19.  I  woke  up  early  this  morning  and  when 
I  opened  the  shutters  the  full  round  sun  was  just  risen. 
I  began  to  repeat  that  verse  of  Shakespeare's :  "  Lo, 
here  the  gentle  lark  weary  of  rest,"  and  bounded  back 
into  bed.  The  bound  made  me  cough  —  I  spat  —  it 
tasted  strange  —  it  was  bright  red  blood.  Since  then 
I've  gone  on  spitting  each  time  I  cough  a  little  more. 
Oh,  yes,  of  course  I  am  frightened.  But  for  two  reasons 
only.  I  don't  want  to  be  ill,  I  mean  '  seriously,'  away 
from  J.  J.  is  the  first  thought.  2nd,  I  don't  want  to  find 
this  is  real  consumption,  perhaps  it's  going  to  gallop 
—  who  knows  ?  —  and  I  shan't  have  my  work  written. 
That's  what  matters.  How  unbearable  it  would  be  to 
die  —  leave  *  scraps,'  '  bits  '  .  .  .  nothing  real  finished. 

But  I  feel  the  first  thing  to  do  is  to  get  back  to  J. 
Yes,  my  right  lung  hurts  me  badly  but  it  always  does 
more  or  less.  But  /.  and  my  work  —  they  are  all  I 
think  of  (mixed  with  curious  visionary  longings  for 
gardens  in  full  flower) .  L.M.  has  gone  for  the  doctor. 

I  knew  this  would  happen.  Now  I'll  say  why.  On 
my  way  here,  in  the  train  from  Paris  to  Marseilles  I 
sat  in  a  carriage  with  two  women.  They  were  both 
dressed  in  black.  One  was  big,  one  little.  The  little 
spry  one  had  a  sweet  smile  and  light  eyes.  She  was  ex- 
tremely pale,  had  been  ill  —  was  come  to  repose  her- 

=  77  - 


Journal  igi8 


self.  The  Big  One,  as  the  night  wore  on,  wrapped  her- 
self up  in  a  black  shawl  —  so  did  her  friend.  They 
shaded  the  lamp  and  started  (trust  'em)  talking  about 
illnesses.  I  sat  in  the  corner  feeling  damned  ill  myself. 

Then  the  big  one,  rolling  about  in  the  shaking  train, 
said  what  a  fatal  place  this  coast  is  for  anyone  who 
is  even  threatened  with  lung  trouble.  She  reeled  off  the 
most  hideous  examples,  especially  one  which  froze  me 
finally,  of  an  American  belle  et  forte  avec  un  simple 
bronchite  who  came  down  here  to  be  cured  and  in 
three  weeks  had  had  a  severe  haemorrhage  and  died. 
"  Adieu  mon  mari,  adieu  mes  beaux  enfants." 

This  recital,  in  that  dark  moving  train,  told  by  that 
big  woman  swathed  in  black,  had  an  effect  on  me  that 
I  wouldn't  own  and  never  mentioned.  I  knew  the 
woman  was  a  fool,  hysterical,  morbid,  but  I  believed 
her;  and  her  voice  has  gone  on  somewhere  echoing  in 
me  ever  since.  .  . . 

Juliette  has  come  in  and  opened  the  windows ;  the 
sea  is  so  full  of  *  little  laughs  '  and  in  the  window 
space  some  tiny  flies  are  busy  with  their  darting,  intri- 
cate dance. 

[Juliette  was  the  little  maid  at  the  hotel  who  devoted  herself 
to  Katherine  Mansfield.  There  are  many  charming  pictures  of 
her  in  the  letters  of  this  time. 

At  last,  after  many  wearing  delays,  Katherine  Mansfield 
received  permission  from  the  "  authorities  "  to  return  to  Eng- 
land. On  the  day,  however,  on  which  she  reached  Paris,  the 
long-range  bombardment  of  the  city  began,  and  all  civilian 
traffic  between  Paris  and  London  was  instantly  suspended.  For 
nearly  three  weeks  she  was  detained  in  Paris,  exhausted  by  her 

=  78  = 


Paris 

illness,  yet  continually  having  to  visit  various  "  authorities  "  for 
permission  either  to  stay  or-  to  depart.  She  managed  to  get  to 
London  on  April  11,  a  shadow  of  herself.  The  ravages  of  four 
months'  anxiety  and  illness  had  been  terrible.] 

April  2.  Paris.  I  am  not  doing  what  I  swore  I  would 
at  Bandol.  I  must  again  write  the  word 

DISCIPLINE 

and  under  that 

WHICH  DO  YOU  PREFER? 

And  from  day  to  day  after  this  keep  a  strict  account 
of  what  it  is  that  I  fail  in.  I  have  failed  very  badly 
these  last  few  days  and  this  evening  was  a  *  comble.' 
This  to  the  uninitiated  would  appear  great  rubbish. 
They'd  suspect  me  of  God  knows  what.  If  only  they 
knew  the  childish  truth !  But  they  won't  know.  Now, 
Katherine,  here  goes  for  to-morrow  —  Keep  it  up,  my 
girl.  It's  such  a  chance,  now  that  L.M.  is  not  I-spy-I. 

April  srd.  A  good  day. 

He  woke,  but  did  not  move.  Warm  and  solemn  he 
lay,  with  wide  open  troubled  eyes,  pouting  a  little,  al- 
most frowning  for  one  long  moment.  In  that  long  mo- 
ment he  sprang  out  of  bed,  bathed,  dressed,  reached 
the  wharf,  boarded  the  ferry  boat,  crossed  the  harbour 
and  was  waving — waving  to  Isabel  and  Maisie  who 
stood  there,  waiting  for  him  on  the  pier.  A  tall  young 
sailor,  standing  near  him,  threw  a  coil  of  tarred  rope 

=  79  = 


Journal   iqi8 

and  it  fell  in  a  long  loop,  over  a  landing  post. . . .  Beau- 
tifully done.  .  .  .  And  all  this  moment  (vision)  was  so 
clear  and  bright  and  tiny,  he  might  with  his  flesh  and 
pout  and  solemn  eyes  have  been  a  baby  watching  a 
bubble. 

"  I'm  there —  I'm  there.  Why  do  I  have  to  start  and 
do  it  all  so  slowly  all  over  again  ?  "  But  as  he  thought 
he  moved  and  the  bubble  vanished  and  was  forgotten. 
He  sat  up  in  bed  smiling,  pulling  down  his  pyjama 
sleeves. 

"  Je  me  repose  " 

April  25.  "Well  sit  down,  Mansfield,  and  reposez- 
vous,"  said  F.,  "  and  I'll  get  on  with  my  dressing." 

So  he  went  into  his  bedroom  and  shut  the  door  be- 
tween, and  I  sat  on  the  end  of  the  sofa.  The  sun  came 
full  through  the  two  windows,  dividing  the  studio  into 
four  —  two  quarters  of  light  and  two  of  shadow,  but 
all  those  things  which  the  light  touched  seemed  to 
float  in  it,  to  bathe  and  to  sparkle  in  it  as  if  they  be- 
longed not  to  land,  but  to  water ;  they  even  seemed, 
in  some  strange  way,  to  be  moving. 

When  you  lean  over  the  edge  of  the  rock  and  see 
something  lovely  and  brilliant  flashing  at  the  bottom 
of  the  sea  it  is  only  the  clear,  trembling  water  that 
dances  —  but  —  can  you  be  quite  sure  ?  .  .  .  No,  not 
quite  sure,  and  that  little  Chinese  group  on  the  writing 
table  may  or  may  not  have  shaken  itself  awake  for 
just  one  hundredth  of  a  second  out  of  hundreds  of 
years  of  sleep. 

Very  beautiful,  O  God !  is  a  blue  tea-pot  with  two 

=  80  = 


Paris,  April  igi8 


Repose 

white  cups  attending;  a  red  apple  among  oranges 
addeth  fire  to  flame  —  in  the  white  bookcases  the 
books  fly  up  and  down  in  scales  of  colour,  with  pink 
and  lilac  notes  recurring,  until  nothing  remains  but 
them,  sounding  over  and  over. 

There  are  a  number  of  frames,  some  painted  and 
some  plain,  leaning  against  the  wall,  and  the  picture 
of  a  naked  woman  with  her  arms  raised,  languid,  as 
though  her  heavy  flowering  beauty  were  almost  too 
great  to  bear.  There  are  two  sticks  and  an  umbrella 
in  one  corner,  and  in  the  fireplace,  a  kettle,  curiously 
like  a  bird. 

White  net  curtains  hang  over  the  windows.  For  all 
the  sun  it  is  raining  outside.  The  gas  in  the  middle  of 
the  room  has  a  pale  yellow  paper  shade  and  as  F. 
dresses  he  keeps  up  a  constant  whistling. 

Reposez-vous. 

Oui,  je  me  repose. . . . 

April  26.  If  I  had  my  way  I  should  stay  in  the  Red- 
cliffe  Road  until  after  the  war.  It  suits  me.  Whatever 
faults  it  has  it  is  not  at  all  bourgeois.  There  is  '  some- 
thing a  bit  queer '  about  all  the  people  who  live  in  it ; 
they  are  all  more  or  less  '  touched.'  They  walk  about 
without  their  hats  on  and  fetch  and  carry  their  food 
and  even  their  coal.  There  are  nearly  four  bells  to 
every  door  —  the  curtains  are  all  *  odd '  and  shabby. 
The  charwomen,  blown  old  flies,  buzz  down  each 
other's  basements.  ..."  No.  56  'ad  a  party  last  night. 
You  never  seen  anything  like  the  stite  of  'is  room  this 

=  81  = 


Journal  igi8 

morning.  ...""...  'Igh  time  'e  did  get  married,  I  say. 
'Is  fiangse  spends  the  night  with  'im  already.  'E  says 
she  'as  'is  bed  and  'e  sleeps  on  the  table.  You  don't  tell 
me  a  great  stick  of  a  fellow  like  'im  sleeps  on  'is 
table!" 

Question:  But  do  you  like  this  sort  of  talk?  This 
kind  of  thing?  What  about  the  Poets  and  —  flowers 
and  trees  ? 

Answer :  As  I  can't  have  the  perfect  other  thing,  I 
do  like  this.  I  feel,  somehow,  free  in  it.  It  has  no  abid- 
ing place,  and  neither  have  I.  And  —  and  —  Oh  well, 
I  do  feel  so  cynical. 

[Since  it  was  out  of  the  question  that  K.M.  should  remain  in 
my  two  dark  ground-floor  rooms  in  Redcliffe  Road,  she  went 
on  May  17  to  Looe  in  Cornwall,  while  I  searched  for  a  house  in 
Hampstead.] 

May  21.  [Looe,  Cornwall. ~\  ...  I  positively  feel,  in  my 
hideous  modern  way,  that  I  can't  get  into  touch  with 
my  mind.  I  am  standing  gasping  in  one  of  those  dis- 
gusting telephone  boxes  and  I  can't  '  get  through.' 

"  Sorry.  There's  no  reply,"  tinkles  out  the  little 
voice. 

"  Will  you  ring  them  again  —  Exchange  ?  A  good 
long  ring.  There  must  be  somebody  there." 

"  I  can't  get  any  answer." 

Then  I  suppose  there  is  nobody  in  the  building  — 
nobody  at  all.  Not  even  an  old  fool  of  a  watchman. 
No,  it's  dark  and  empty  and  quiet  .  .  .  above  all  — 
empty. 

=  82  = 


Looe 

Note:  A  queer  thing  is  that  I  keep  seeing  it  —  this 
empty  building  —  as  my  father's  office.  I  smell  it  as 
that.  I  see  the  cage  of  the  clumsy  wooden  goods  lift 
and  the  tarred  ropes  hanging. 

May  22.  The  sea  here  is  real  sea.  It  rises  and  falls  with 
a  loud  noise,  has  a  long,  silky  roll  on  it  as  though  it 
purred,  seems  sometimes  to  climb  half  up  into  the  sky 
and  you  see  the  sail  boats  perched  upon  clouds  —  like 
flying  cherubs. 

Hallo !  here  come  two  lovers.  She  has  a  pinched-in 
waist,  a  hat  like  a  saucer  turned  upside  down  —  he 
sham  panama,  hat  guard,  cane,  etc. ;  his  arm  enfold- 
ing. Walking  between  sea  and  sky.  His  voice  floats 
up  to  me :  "  Of  course,  occasional  tinned  meat  does  not 
matter,  but  a  perpetual  diet  of  tinned  meat  is  bound  to 
produce  .  .  ." 

I  am  sure  that  the  Lord  loves  them  and  that  they 
and  their  seed  will  prosper  and  multiply  for  ever  and 
ever. . .  . 

[Those  of  the  following  phrases  which  are  marked  K.M.  (by 
herself)  are  her  own.  One  or  two  of  the  rest  may  be  quotations.] 

...  to  meet,  on  the  stopping  of  the  chariot,  the  au- 
gust emergence. 

The  jewel  wrapped  up  in  a  piece  of  old  silk  and  nego- 
tiable one  day  in  the  market  of  misery. 

Luxuriant  complications  which  make  the  air  too 
tropical.  .  .  . 

The  sense  of  folded  flowers  ...  as  though  the  night 

=  83  = 


Journal   iqi8 

had  laid  its  hand  upon  their  hearts  and  they  were 
folded  and  at  peace  like  folded  flowers.  (K.M.) 

.  .  .  plucked  her  sensations  by  the  way,  detached, 
nervously,  the  small  wild  blossoms  of  her  dim  forest. 

The  high  luxury  of  not  having  to  explain.  .  .  . 

The  ostrich  burying  its  head  in  the  sand  does  at  any 
rate  wish  to  convey  the  impression  that  its  head  is  the 
most  important  part  of  it.  (K.M.  Good.) 

Though  she  did  in  a  way,  simply  offer  herself  to  me 
she  was  so  cold,  so  rich,  so  splendid,  that  I  simply 
couldn't  see  a  spoon  silver  enough  to  dare  help  myself 
with (K.M.) 

If  there  were  going  to  be  large  freedoms  she  was  de- 
termined to  enjoy  them  too.  She  wasn't  going  to  be 
perched,  swaying  perilous  in  the  changing  jungle  like 
a  little  monkey  dropped  from  a  tree  on  an  elephant's 
head  —  and  positively  clinging  to  some  large  ear. 
(K.M.) 

She  was  the  same  through  and  through.  You  could 
go  on  cutting  slice  after  slice  and  you  knew  you  would 
never  light  upon  a  plum  or  a  cherry  or  even  a  piece  of 
peel. 

Our  friends  are  only  a  more  or  less  imperfect  em- 
bodiment of  our  ideas. . . . 

June.  Looe.  Feature  Extraordinary :  Shoes  that  have 
never  squeaked  before  start  up  a  squeaking. 

A  cold  day  —  the  cuckoo  singing  and  the  sea  like 
liquid  metal.  Everything  feels  detached  —  uprooted 
—  flying  through  the  hurtling  air  or  about  to  fly. 

=  84  = 


Mrs.  Honey 


There's  almost  a  sense  of  having  to  dodge  these  un- 
natural rudderless  birds.  ...  To  use  a  homely  image, 
imagine  the  world  an  immense  drying  ground  with 
everything  blown  off  the  lines.  ...  It  is  very  nervously 
exhausting. 

And  the  day  spent  itself The  idle  hours  blew  on 

it  and  it  shed  itself  like  seed.  .  .  . 

[Mrs.  Honey,  in  the  following  note,  was  the  chambermaid  in 
the  hotel  at  Looe,  and  like  most  of  her  servants,  devoted  to 
Katherine  Mansfield.] 

Later 

Mrs.  Honey  explains.  She  has  been  crying.  Madame 
spoke  to  her  "  awful  crool  "  about  a  cracked  tumbler. 
Lied.  Bullied.  And  the  poor  old  creature,  who  has  had 
15  rooms  to  do  lately  and  three  nights  of  stairs  to  scrub 
(age  68)  "  couldn't  help  but  cry.  .  .  ." 

I  wish  Madame  would  develop  a  tumour  during  the 
night,  have  it  cut  out  to-morrow  and  be  "  dead,  buried 
and  a',"  before  the  Sunday  dinner.  She  is  exactly  like 
a  large  cow  in  a  black  silk  dress  —  and  she  will  never, 
never,  NEVER  die. 

"  If  the  fire  turns  bright,  your  maan  is  in  a  good 
temper."  (Mrs.  Honey.) 

Later 

I  went  into  J.'s  room  just  now  to  put  a  book  there 

—  and  turned  down  the  pink  bed  cover  to  see  if  he  had 

enough  blankets.  As  I  did  so  I  thought  of  J.  as  a  boy 

of  about  17.  I  had  a  sort  of  prophetic  vision  of  doing 

=  8S  = 


Journal   igi8 


just  the  same  thing  for  my  son  ...  in  years  to  come. 
The  moment  had  no  emotional  value  at  all  —  espe- 
cially as  it  was  all  drowned  in  the  smell  of  roast  mut- 
ting.  There  goes  the  gong :  it  sounds  like  a  timid  fire 
alarm.  But  I  wait  until  the  first  course  is  done.  I  wait 
until  the  chimpanzees  have  lapped  up  their  little  pool 
before  I  start  a-nut-cracking  wiv  'em. 

Later 
The  table  was  laid  for  two.  I  dined  opposite  a  white 
serviette  —  shaped  like  a  hand  with  spread  fingers. 
Now  I  have  dressed  and  am  waiting  for  the  motor.  I 
rubbed  some  genet  fleuri  on  my  collar  just  now:  I  look 
different  —  as  though  I  were  meant  to  be  played  on 
and  not  just  to  lie  in  a  corner,  with  the  bow  in  that 
slot  opposite  which  fastens  with  two  buttons.  No! 
Now  the  bow  is  hanging  from  the  peg  —  at  least. 

June:  Paralysis  as  an  idea.  A  pleasant  one.  Spinal 
disease.  A  shock.  Failure  of  the  Heart's  Action.  Some 
Lofe.  "  obscure  "  Horror.  Dead  before  Friday.  A 

T0  jye  cripple  —  unable  to  speak  —  My  face  all 
read  after  deformed.  But  the  top  and  bottom  of  this 
it  has  sangwidge  is  a  paralytic  stroke  —  the  im- 

happened  portant  middle  —  heart  failure.  Well  I've 
cut  it  for  myself  and  eaten  it  day  after  day  —  day  after 
day  —  It's  an  endless  loaf.  .  .  .  And  I'd  like  to  put  on 
quiet  record  that  the  physical  pain  is  just  not  unbear- 
able —  only  just  not. 

At  4.30  to-day  it  did  conquer  me  and  I  began,  like 

=  86  = 


Misery 

the  Tchehov  students,  to  "  pace  from  corner  to  cor- 
ner "  —  then  up  and  down,  up  and  down,  and  the  pain 
racked  me  like  a  curse  and  I  could  hardly  breathe. 
Then  I  sat  down  again  and  tried  to  take  it  quietly.  But 
although  I've  an  armchair  and  a  fire  and  little  table  all 
drawn  up  comfortable  I  feel  too  ill  to  write.  I  could 
dictate  I  think  p'raps  —  but  write  —  no.  Trop  Ma- 
lade. 

I  have  been,  in  addition,  waiting  for  A.  all  the  after- 
noon. I  thought,  even  in  this  storm,  she'd  "  blow 
over."  "  Hillo !  "  And  about  ioo  A.s  with  quick  de- 
liberate steps  have  walked  up  this  brick  path  but  got 
no  further.  Plus  that,  I  have  nothing  to  read.  Hur- 
rah!!! 

One's  *  salvation  '  would  I  think  be  music.  To  have 
a  'cello  again.  That  I  must  try.  .  .  . 

June  20th.  The  twentieth  of  June  1918. 

C'est  de  la  misere. 

Non,  pas  ca  exactement.  II  y  a  quelque  chose  —  une 
profonde  malaise  me  suive  comme  un  ombre. 

Oh,  why  write  bad  French  ?  Why  write  at  all  ?  1 1,500 
miles  are  so  many  —  too  many  by  11,449^4  for  me. 
[New  Zealand  is  that  distance  from  England.] 

June  21.  What  is  the  matter  with  to-day?  It  is  thin, 
white,  as  lace  curtains  are  white,  full  of  ugly  noises 
(e.g.  people  opening  the  drawers  of  a  cheap  chest  and 
trying  to  shut  them  again) .  All  food  seems  stodgy  and 
indigestible  —  no  drink  is  hot  enough.  One  looks  hide- 

=  87  = 


Journal  igi8 

ous,  hideous  in  the  glass  —  bald  as  an  egg —  one  feels 
swollen  —  and  all  one's  clothes  are  tight.  And  every- 
thing is  dusty,  gritty — the  cigarette  ash  crumbles 
and  falls  —  the  marigolds  spill  their  petals  over  the 
dressing  table.  In  a  house  nearby  someone  is  trying  to 
tune  a  cheap  cheap  piano. 

If  I  had  a  '  home '  and  could  pull  the  curtains  to- 
gether, lock  the  door  —  burn  something  sweet,  fast, 
walk  round  my  own  perfect  room,  soundlessly,  watch- 
ing the  lights  and  the  shadows  —  it  would  be  tolerable 
—  but  living  as  I  do  in  a  public  house  —  it's  tres 
difficile. 

A  few  of  its  enormities. 

1.  I  decided  to  faire  les  ongles  de  mes  pieds  avant 
mon  petit  dejeuner  —  and  did  not  —  from  idleness. 

2.  The  coffee  was  not  hot:  the  bacon  salt,  and  the 
plate  shewed  that  it  had  been  fried  in  a  dirty  pan. 

3.  I  could  not  think  of  any  small  talk  for  Mrs. 
Honey,  who  seemed  silent  and  distrait  —  burning 
with  a  very  feeble  wick. . . . 

4.  J.'s  letter  telling  of  all  his  immense  difficulties  — 
all  the  impossible  things  he  must  do  before  he  could 
start  his  holiday  left  me  lukewarm.  It  had  somehow  a 
flat  taste  —  and  I  felt  rather  as  tho'  I'd  read  it  curi- 
ously apart,  not  united. 

5.  A  vague  stomach-ache  in  my  bath. 

6.  Nothing  to  read  and  too  rainy  to  go  out. 

7.  A.  came  —  and  did  not  ring.  I  felt  she  had 
enough  of  our  friendship  for  the  present.  .  .  . 

8.  Very  bad  lunch.  A  small  tough  rissole  which  was 

=  88  = 


Strange  Hotels 


no  use  to  the  functions  and  some  rather  watery  goose- 
berries. I  despise  terribly  English  cooking. 

9.  Went  for  a  walk  and  was  caught  in  the  wind  and 
rain.  Terribly  cold  and  wretched. 

10.  The  tea  was  not  hot.  I  meant  not  to  eat  the  bun 
but  I  ate  it.  Over-smoked. 

Hotels 

I  seem  to  spend  half  of  my  life  arriving  at  strange 
hotels.  And  asking  if  I  may  go  to  bed  immediately. 

"  And  would  you  mind  filling  my  hot  water  bot- 
tle? ..  .  Thank  you;  that  is  delicious.  No,  I  shan't  re- 
quire anything  more." 

The  strange  door  shuts  upon  the  stranger,  and  then 
I  slip  down  in  the  sheets.  Waiting  for  the  shadows  to 
come  out  of  the  corners  and  spin  their  slow,  slow  web 
over  the  Ugliest  Wallpaper  of  All. 

Pulmonary  Tuberculosis 
The  man  in  the  room  next  to  mine  has  the  same 
complaint  as  I.  When  I  wake  in  the  night  I  hear  him 
turning.  And  then  he  coughs.  And  I  cough.  And  after 
a  silence  I  cough.  And  he  coughs  again.  This  goes  on 
for  a  long  time.  Until  I  feel  we  are  like  two  roosters 
calling  to  each  other  at  false  dawn.  From  far-away 
hidden  farms. 

Jour  Maigre 

On  Wednesday  mornings  Mrs.  Honey  comes  into 
my  room  as  usual  and  pulls  up  the  blinds  and  opens 
the  big  french  windows.  Letting  in  the  dancing  light 

=  89  = 


Journal   iqi8 


and  the  swish  of  the  sea  and  the  creak  of  the  boats 
lying  at  anchor  out  in  the  Roads,  and  the  sound 
of  the  lawn  mower  and  the  smell  of  cut  grass  and 
syringa  and  the  cheeky  whistle  of  that  same  black- 
bird. 

Then  she  comes  back  to  my  bed  and  stands  over 
me,  one  hand  pressed  to  her  side,  her  old  face  puck- 
ered up  as  though  she  had  some  news  that  she  didn't 
know  how  to  break  gently. 

"  'Tis  a  meatless  day  "  says  she. 

Pic-Nic 

When  the  two  women  in  white  came  down  to  the 
lonely  beach — She  threw  away  her  paintbox  —  and 
She  threw  away  her  notebook.  Down  they  sat  on 
the  sand.  The  tide  was  low.  Before  them  the  weedy 
rocks  were  like  some  herd  of  shaggy  beasts  huddled 
at  the  pool  to  drink  and  staying  there  in  a  kind  of 
stupor. 

Then  She  went  off  and  dabbled  her  legs  in  a  pool 
thinking  about  the  colour  of  flesh  under  water.  And 
She  crawled  into  a  dark  cave  and  sat  there  thinking 
about  her  childhood.  Then  they  came  back  to  the 
beach  and  flung  themselves  down  on  their  bellies,  hid- 
ing their  heads  in  their  arms.  They  looked  like  two 

swans. 

Grownup  edness 

Four  o'clock.  Is  it  light  now  at  four  o'clock?  I  jump 
out  of  bed  and  run  over  to  the  window.  It  is  half-light, 
neither  black  nor  blue.  The  wing  of  the  coast  is  violet; 

=  90  = 


so   Very   Quiet" 


in  the  lilac  sky  there  are  dark  banners  and  little  black 
boats  manned  by  black  shadows  put  out  on  the  purple 
water. 

Oh !  how  often  I  have  watched  this  hour  when  I  was 
a  girl !  But  then  —  I  stayed  at  the  window  until  I  grew 
cold  —  until  I  was  icy  —  thrilled  by  something  —  I 
did  not  know  what.  Now  I  fly  back  into  bed,  pulling  up 
the  clothes,  tucking  them  into  my  neck.  And  suddenly 
my  feet  find  the  hot  water  bottle.  Heavens !  it  is  still 
beautifully  warm.  That  really  is  thrilling. 

Dame  Seule 

She  is  little  and  grey,  with  a  black  velvet  band  round 
her  hair,  false  teeth,  and  skinny  little  hands  coming 
out  of  frills  like  the  frills  on  cutlets. 

As  I  passed  her  room  one  morning  I  saw  her 
'worked'  brush-and-comb  bag  and  her  Common 
Prayerbook. 

Also,  when  she  goes  to  the  '  Ladies/  for  some  ob- 
scure reason  she  wears  a  little  shawl. .  .  . 

At  the  dining  table,  smiling  brightly :  —  "  This  is 
the  first  time  I  have  ever  travelled  alone,  or  stayed  by 
myself  in  a  Strange  Hotel.  But  my  husband  does  not 
mind.  As  it  is  so  Very  Quiet.  Of  course,  if  it  were  a 

Gay  Place "  And  she  draws  in  her  chin,  and  the 

bead  chain  rises  and  falls  on  her  vanished  bosom. 

Remembrance 
Always,  when  I  see  foxgloves,  I  think  of  the  L.'s. 
Again  I  pass  in  front  of  their  cottage  and  in  the 

=  91  = 


Journal  igi8 

window,  between  the  daffodil  curtains  with  the  green 
spots  —  there  are  the  great,  sumptuous  blooms. 

"  And  how  beautiful  they  are  against  the  white- 
wash! "  cry  the  L.'s. 

As  is  their  custom,  when  they  love  anything,  they 
make  a  sort  of  Festa.  With  foxgloves  everywhere.  And 
then  they  sit  in  the  middle  of  them,  like  blissful  pris- 
oners, dining  in  an  encampment  of  Indian  Braves. 

Strawberries  and  a  Sailing  Ship 

We  sat  on  the  top  of  the  cliff  overlooking  the  open 
sea.  Our  backs  turned  to  the  little  town.  Each  of  us 
had  a  basket  of  strawberries.  We  had  just  bought 
them  from  a  dark  woman  with  quick  eyes  —  berry- 
finding  eyes. 

"  They're  fresh  picked,"  said  she,  "  from  our  own 
garden." 

The  tips  of  her  fingers  were  stained  a  bright  red. 
But  what  strawberries !  Each  one  was  the  finest  — 
the  perfect  berry  —  the  strawberry  Absolute — the 
fruit  of  our  childhood !  The  very  air  came  fanning  on 
strawberry  wings.  And  down  below,  in  the  pools,  little 
children  were  bathing,  with  strawberry  faces.  .  .  . 

Over  the  blue,  swinging  water,  came  a  three-masted 
sailing-ship  —  with  nine,  ten,  eleven  sails.  Wonder- 
fully beautiful!  She  came  riding  by  as  though  every 
sail  were  taking  its  fill  of  the  sun  and  the  light. 

And :  "  Oh  how  I'd  love  to  be  on  board !  "  said  Anne. 

(The  captain  was  below,  but  the  crew  lay  about, 

idle  and  handsome.  "  Have  some  strawberries !  "  we 

=  92  = 


T  chehov 


said,  slipping  and  sliding  on  the  rocking  decks,  and 
shaking  the  baskets.  They  ate  them  in  a  kind  of 
dream.  .  .  .) 

And  the  ship  sailed  on.  Leaving  us  in  a  kind  of 
dream,  too.  With  the  empty  baskets.  .  .  . 

[At  the  beginning  of  July  K.M.  returned  to  Redcliffe  Road. 
At  the  end  of  the  month  we  moved  into  No.  2  Portland  Villas, 
East  Heath  Road,  Hampstead.] 

July  5.  [47  Redcliffe  Road.']  To-day,  this  evening, 
after  I  have  come  home  (for  I  must  go  out  and  buy 
some  fruits)  commence  encore  une  vie  nouvelle.  Turn 
over  and  you'll  see  how  good  I  become  —  a  different 
child. 

Later.  I  have  read  —  given  way  to  reading  —  two 
books  by  Octave  Mirbeau  —  and  after  them  I  see 
dreadfully  and  finally,  ( 1 )  that  the  French  are  a  filthy 
people,  (2)  that  their  corruption  is  so  puante  —  I'll 
not  go  near  'em  again.  No,  the  English  couldn't  stoop 
to  this.  They  aren't  human;  they  are  in  the  good  old 
English  parlance — monkeys. 

I  must  start  writing  again.  They  decide  me.  Some- 
thing must  be  put  up  against  this. 

Ach,  Tchehov !  why  are  you  dead  ?  Why  can't  I  talk 
to  you,  in  a  big  darkish  room,  at  late  evening  —  where 
the  light  is  green  from  the  waving  trees  outside.  I'd 
like  to  write  a  series  of  Heavens:  that  would  be  one. 

I  must  not  forget  my  timidity  before  closed  doors. 
My  debate  as  to  whether  I  shall  ring  too  loud  or  not 

=  93  = 


Journal  1918 

loud  enough.  .  .  .  It's  deep  deep  deep :  in  fact  it  is  the 
*  explanation  '  of  the  failure  of  K.M.  as  a  writer  up  to 
the  present,  and  Oh!  what  a  good  anfang  zu  einem 
Geschichte! 

The  Eternal  Question 

I  pose  myself,  yet  once  more,  my  Eternal  Question. 
What  is  it  that  makes  the  moment  of  delivery  so  diffi- 
cult for  me?  If  I  were  to  sit  down  —  now  —  and  just 
to  write  out,  plain,  some  of  the  stories  —  all  written, 
all  ready,  in  my  mind  'twould  take  me  days.  There  are 
so  many  of  them.  I  sit  and  think  them  out  and  if  I 
overcome  my  lassitude  and  do  take  the  pen  they  ought 
[(they  are  so  word  perfect)  to  write  themselves.  But 
it's  the  activity.  I  haven't  a  place  to  write  in  or  on  — 
the  chair  isn't  comfortable  —  yet  even  as  I  complain 
this  seems  the  place  and  this  the  chair.  And  don't 
I  want  to  write  them  ?  Lord !  Lord !  it's  my  only  desire 
—  my  one  happy  issue.  And  only  yesterday  I  was 
thinking  —  even  my  present  state  of  health  is  a  great 
gain.  It  makes  things  so  rich,  so  important,  so  longed 
for  . . .  changes  one's  focus. 

.  .  .  When  one  is  little  and  ill  and  far  away  in  a 
remote  bedroom  all  that  happens  beyond  is  marvel- 
lous. .  .  .  Alors,  I  am  always  in  that  remote  bedroom. 
Is  that  why  I  seem  to  see,  this  time  in  London  — 
nothing  but  what  is  marvellous  —  marvellous  —  and 
incredibly  beautiful? 

The  tide  is  full  in  the  RedclifFe  Road.  One  by  one 
the  doors  have  opened,  have  slammed  shut.  Now,  in 

=  94  = 


The  Redcliff e  Road 


their  blind  way,  the  houses  are  fed.  That  poor  little 
violin  goes  on,  tearing  up  note  after  note  —  there  is  a 
strange  dazzling  white  cloud  over  the  houses  and  a 
pool  of  blue. 

Evening  Primrose 
"  All  my  virtues  —  all  my  rich  nature  —  gone,"  she 
said,  "  grown  over,  tangled,  forgotten,  deserted  like  a 
once  upon  a  time  garden."  She  smiled  and  pulled  down 
her  hat  and  pulled  her  coat  together  as  though  making 
ready  to  stumble  out  into  it  and  be  lost  too.  "  A  dark 
place"  said  she,  wavering  to  her  feet.  And  then  she 
smiled  again.  "  Perhaps  there  is  just  left  my  —  my  — 
curiosity  about  myself.  Evening  Primrose.  .  .  ."  She 
half  shut  her  eyes,  stooping  forward,  curiously  as 
though  the  plant  had  sprung  up  at  her  feet.  "  I  always 
did  hate  evening  primroses.  They  sound  such  darlings, 
but  when  you  see  one  they're  such  weedy,  shabby  — 
flower  on  the  grave  without  a  grave  stone  —  sort  of 
things  —  I  don't  mean  anything  symbolical  by  that," 
said  she,  "  God  forbid !  "  and  was  gone. 

The  Redcliff e  Road 

Maisie  —  the  student  —  their  lodgers  —  she  risks 
anything. 

The  little  leaf  that  blows  in  —  her  memory  of  the 
park  and  crocodile  —  then  there  must  be  her  cat 
called  Millie.  That  quick  Hook  on,  dear  girl  —  and 
the  pain  so  great  that  she  almost  sobs.  But  nothing 
happens  — 

=  95  = 


Journal  igi8 


Nay,  though  my  heart  should  break, 
I  would  not  bind  you. 

Miss  Ruddick  who  always  plays  with  her  music 
propped  against  the  towel  rail,  and  whenever  she  pulls 
out  her  handkerchief  out  comes  an  end  of  resin 
gummed  on  a  flannel  as  well. 

On  these  summer  evenings  the  sound  of  the  steps 
along  the  street  is  quite  different.  They  knock-knock- 
knock  along,  but  lightly  and  easily,  as  though  they 
belonged  to  people  who  were  walking  home  at  their 
ease,  after  a  procession  or  a  pic-nic  or  a  day  at  the  sea. 

The  sky  is  pale  and  clear:  the  silly  piano  is  over- 
come and  reels  out  waltzes  —  old  waltzes,  spinning, 
drunk  with  sentiment  —  gorged  with  memory. 

This  is  the  hour  when  the  poor  underfed  dog  ap- 
pears, at  a  run,  nosing  the  dry  gutter.  He  is  so  thin  that 
his  body  is  like  a  cage  on  four  wooden  pegs.  .  .  .  His 
lean  triangle  of  a  head  is  down,  his  long  straight  tail 
is  out,  and  up  and  down,  up  and  down  he  goes,  silent 
and  fearfully  eager.  The  street  watches  him  from  its 
creeper-covered  balconies,  from  its  open  windows  — 
but  the  fat  lady  on  the  ground  floor  who  is  no  better 
than  she  should  be  comes  out  —  down  the  steps  to  the 
gate,  with  a  bone.  His  tail  as  he  waits  for  her  to  give 
it  him,  bangs  against  the  gate  post,  like  a  broomhandle 
—  and  the  street  says  she's  a  fool  to  go  feeding  strange 
dogs.  Now  she'll  never  be  rid  of  him. 

(What  I'd  like  to  convey  is  that  at  this  hour,  with 
this  half  light  and  the  pianos  and  the  open,  empty 

=  96  = 


Inconsequence 


sounding  houses,  he  is  the  spirit  of  the  street  —  run- 
ning up  and  down,  poor  dog,  when  he  ought  to  have 
been  done  away  with  years  ago.) 

The  Middle  of  the  Note 

Whenever  I  have  a  conversation  about  Art  which 
is  more  or  less  interesting  I  begin  to  wish  to  God  I 
could  destroy  all  that  I  have  written  and  start  again : 
it  all  seems  like  so  many  *  false  starts.'  Musically 
speaking,  it  is  not  —  has  not  been  —  in  the  middle  of 
the  note  —  you  know  what  I  mean  ?  When,  on  a  cold 
morning  perhaps,  youVe  been  playing  and  it  has 
sounded  all  right — until  suddenly,  you  realize  you 
are  warm —  you  have  only  just  begun  to  play.  Oh,  how 
badly  this  is  expressed!  How  confused  and  even  un- 
grammatical ! 

Now  the  day  was  divine  —  warm  soft  sunshine  lay 
upon  her  arms  and  breast  like  velvet  —  tiny  clouds, 
silver  ones  shone  upon  the  dazzling  blue  —  the  garden 
trees  were  full  of  gold  light  —  and  a  strange  bright- 
ness came  from  the  houses  —  from  the  open  windows 
with  their  fairy  curtains  and  flower  pots  . . .  the  white 
steps  and  the  narrow  spiked  railings. 

Inconsequence 

"  Did  M.  wear  a  grey  dressing  gown  with  a  dark 
red  piping,"  she  asked. 

"  No,  he  was  dressed." 

"  Oh !  Then  I  suppose  he  was  very  dressed,  he  al- 
ways is." 

=  97  = 


Journal  igi8 

That  made  her  think  suddenly,  of  another  friend 
of  his  —  a  young  fattish  man  who  wore  spectacles  and 
was  extremely  serious  with  a  kind  of  special  fatness 
that  she  had  noticed  went  with  just  that  kind  of 
seriousness.  She  saw  him  standing  by  a  washtable 
drying  his  neck  —  and  she  saw  his  hair  right  to  the 
neck-band  of  his  shirt.  His  hair  was,  as  usual,  too 
long. 

"  How  awful  S.  must  be  without  a  collar !  " 

"Without  a  collar?  "  He  looked  at  her;  he  almost 
gasped. 

"  Yes,  in  a  shirt  and  trousers." 

"  In  a  shirt  and  trousers !  "  he  exclaimed.  "  I've 
never  seen  him  in  one  —  " 

"No  —  but—  Oh,  well  —  " 

He  positively  fixed  her  at  that. 

"How  extraordinarily  inconsequential  you  are!" 

And  all  in  a  minute  she  was  laughing. 

"  Well,"  she  said,  "  men  are " 

And  she  looked  out  of  the  window  at  the  tall  poplar, 
with  its  whispering  leaves,  with  its  beautiful  top,  gold 
in  the  last  sunlight. 

On  the  wall  of  the  kitchen  there  was  a  shadow, 
shaped  like  a  little  mask  with  two  gold  slits  for  eyes. 
It  danced  up  and  down. 

August  2nd.  2  Portland  Villas,  Hampstead.  Her  heart 
had  not  spoken.  .  .  .  When  it  does — too  late  —  the 
pain  of  it.  I  ought  to  have  felt  like  this  —  often, 
often.  .  .  . 

=  98  = 


A   Dark   Day 

September  20th.  My  fits  of  temper  are  really  terrify- 
ing. I  had  one  this  (Sunday)  morning  and  tore  a  page 
up  of  the  book  I  was  reading  —  and  absolutely  lost  my 
head.  Very  significant.  When  it  was  over  J.  came  in 
and  stared.  "What  is  the  matter?  What  have  you 
done?  Why?  You  look  all  dark."  He  drew  back  the 
curtains  and  called  it  an  effect  of  light  but  when  I 
came  into  my  studio  to  dress  I  saw  it  was  not  that. 
I  was  a  deep  earthy  colour,  with  pinched  eyes. 
Strangely  enough  these  fits  are  L.  and  F.  over  again. 
I  am  more  like  L.  than  anybody.  We  are  unthinkably 
alike,  in  fact. 

It  is  a  dark  reluctant  day.  The  fire  makes  a  noise 
like  a  flag  —  and  there  is  the  familiar  sound  from  be- 
low of  someone  filling  buckets.  I  am  very  stiff,  very 
unused  to  writing  now,  and  yet,  as  I  sit  here  it's  as 
though  my  dear  one,  my  only  one,  came  and  sat  down 
opposite  me  and  gazed  at  me  across  the  table.  And  I 
think  suddenly  of  the  verses  which  seemed  so  awfully 
good  in  my  girlhood. 

Others  leave  me  —  all  things  leave  me, 
You  remain. 

My  room  really  has  for  me  a  touch  of  fairy.  Is  there 
anything  better  than  my  room?  Anything  outside? 
The  kitten  says  not  —  but  then  it's  such  a  hunting 
ground  for  the  kitten ;  the  sun  throws  the  shape  of  the 
window  on  to  the  carpet,  and  in  those  four  little  square 
fields  the  silly  flies  wander,  ever  so  spied  upon  by  the 
little  lion  under  the  sommier  frill. . . . 

=  99  = 


Journal  igi8 

Oh  dear  —  Oh  dear — where  are  my  people?  With 
whom  have  I  been  happiest?  With  nobody  in  particu- 
lar. It  has  all  been  mush  of  a  mushness. 

Later.  That  kitten  took  sick,  was  taken  away,  lived 
two  weeks  in  great  torture,  then  for  two  days,  it  lost 
the  will  to  live.  It  became  just  a  cotton  reel  of  fur  with 
two  great  tearful  eyes :  "  Why  has  this  happened  to 
me?  "  so  the  vet.  killed  it.  It  had  gastric  trouble,  acute 
constipation  with  a  distended  belly,  and  canker  in 
both  ears.  The  two  days  before  it  went  away  it  suf- 
fered here.  I  bought  it  a  ball  and  it  tried  to  play  a  little 

—  but  no !  It  couldn't  even  wash  itself.  It  came  up  to 
me,  stood  on  its  hind  legs,  opened  its  little  jaws  and 
tried  to  mew.  No  sound  came ;  I  never  saw  anything 
more  pitiful. 

September  30.  I  hope  this  pen  works.  Yes,  it  does. 

The  last  day  in  September  —  immensely  cold,  a 
kind  of  solid  cold  outside  the  windows.  My  lire  has 
played  traitor  nearly  all  day  and  I  have  been,  in  the 
good,  old-fashioned  way,  feeling  my  skin  curl. 

Don't  read  this.  Do  you  hear  that  train  whistle  and 
now  the  leaves  —  the  dry  leaves  —  and  now  the  fire 

—  fluttering  and  breaking. 

Why  doesn't  she  bring  the  lamps  ? 

October  21.  L.M.  is  going  to  town.  I  must  take  some 
of  my  dear  money  out  of  the  Bank  and  give  it  her.  I 
am  in  bed;  I  feel  very  sick.  Queer  altogether — de- 

=  100  = 


'Russian   Country* 


composing  a  bit.  It's  a  pale  silent  day:  I  would  like  to 
be  walking  in  a  wood,  far  away. 

Health  seems  to  me  now  more  remote  than  any- 
thing—  unattainable.  Best  to  stay  in  bed  and  be 
horrid  from  there.  This  sky  in  waves  of  blue  and  cream 
and  grey  is  like  the  sky  overhanging  a  dead  calm  sea, 
when  you  hear  someone  rowing,  far  far  away;  and 
then  the  voices  from  the  boat  and  the  rattle  of  the 
chain  and  the  barking  of  the  ship's  dog  all  sound  loud. 
There  is  as  usual  a  smell  of  onions  and  chop  bones 
in  the  house. 

What  do  I  want  her  to  buy  for  me  ?  When  it  really 
becomes  an  urgent  matter  —  I  want  nothing  —  waste 
of  money  —  I  feel  like  Mile.  Seguin,  who  wouldn't 
hang  the  pictures  in  her  new  flat  becau.se  Life  is  such 
a  breathy  little  Dolly. 

October.  Hampstead.  I  ought  to  write  something  brief 
for  the  Nation  to-day  and  earn  a  bit  more  money,  a 
"  Little  Lunch  at  the  Club  "  or  something  of  that  kind. 
It's  not  difficult ;  in  fact  it  is  too  easy  for  me  because 
if  I  do  err  more  on  one  side  than  t'other  —  I'm  over- 
fluent. 

This  view  from  the  window  is  simply  superb  —  the 
pale  sky  and  the  half  bare  trees.  It's  so  beautiful  it 
might  be  the  country  —  Russian  country  as  /  see  it. 

I  never  connected  until  to-day  —  sang  froid  with 
Cold  blood.  This  is  a  word  which  is  one  of  New  Zea- 
land's queer  'uns,  like  calling  the  Savoy  the  Savoy  — 
or  talking  of  the  aryeighted  bread  shops.  Sagn  freud. 

=  101  = 


Journal  iqi8 


October  24.  This  is  simply  the  most  Divine  Spot.  So 
remote,  so  peaceful;  full  of  colour,  full  of  Autumn; 
the  sunset  is  real  and  the  sound  of  somebody  splitting 
small  wood  is  real,  too.  If  only  one  could  live  up  here 
for  really  a  long  time  and  not  have  to  see  anybody. . .  . 
It  might  very  well  be  France,  it's  much  more  like 
France  than  it  is  like  England. 

The  place  —  remote  —  the  dresses  and  scarves  old; 
The  year,  —  fruitful!  their  talk  and  laughter  gay. 

The  Ladies  Club  in  Wartime 
Ladies  to  the  Centre:  A  round  hall,  very  dim, 
lighted  from  above.  A  loud  reluctant  (swing  glass) 
door  that  can't  bear  people  trying  to  burst  their  way 
in  and  loathes  people  trying  to  burst  their  way  out.  To 
one  side  of  the  door  the  porter's  cave  dotted  with 
pigeon  holes,  and  a  desk,  furnished  with  a  telephone, 
usually  a  big  tea-stained  china  tea  cup  crowned  with 
its  saucer.  In  front  of  it  a  squeaking  revolving  chair 
with  a  torn  imitation  leather  seat. 

Good-night 

And  once  again  the  door  opened  and  she  passed,  as 
it  were  into  another  world  —  the  world  of  night,  cold, 
timeless,  inscrutable. 

Again  she  saw  the  beautiful  fall  of  the  steps,  the 
dark  garden  edged  with  fluttering  ivy  —  on  the  other 
side  of  the  road  the  huge  bare  willows  —  and  above 
them  the  sky  big  and  bright  with  stars. 

Again  there  came  that  silence  that  was  a  question 

-  102  = 


The  Fly 

—  but  this  time  she  did  not  hesitate.  She  moved  for- 
ward, very  softly  and  gently  —  as  though  fearful  of 
making  a  ripple  in  that  boundless  pool  of  quiet.  She 
put  her  arm  round  her  friend.  The  friend  is  astonished 

—  murmurs  "It  has  been  so  nice."  The  other  — 
"  Good-night,  dear  friend."  A  long  tender  embrace. 
Yes,  that  was  it  —  of  course  that  was  what  was  want- 
ing. 

The  Blow 

"  I  "  —  like  a  blow  on  her  heart  —  "I  have  come 

—  for " 

She  leaned  against  the  door,  quite  faint. 
"Yes?"  said  she. 

"  This  —  ,"  tightly,  quickly,  he  caught  her  up  into 
his  arms. 

The  Fly 

December  31.  4.45  p.m.  Oh,  the  times  when  she  had 
walked  upside  down  on  the  ceiling,  run  up  glittering 
panes,  floated  on  a  lake  of  light,  flashed  through  a 
shining  beam! 

And  God  looked  upon  the  fly  fallen  into  the  jug  of 
milk  and  saw  that  it  was  good.  And  the  smallest 
Cherubim  and  Seraphim  of  all,  who  delight  in  mis- 
fortune, struck  their  silver  harps  and  shrilled :  "  How 
is  the  fly  fallen,  fallen !  " 


=  103 


ipip 

January  i.  J.  came  to  bed  at  ten  minutes  to  twelve. 
Said  he :  "  Don't  go  to  sleep  before  the  New  Year."  I 
lay  holding  my  watch.  I  think  I  did  go  to  sleep  for  a 
moment.  The  window  was  wide  open  and  I  looked  out 
and  over  a  big  soft  hollow,  with  a  sprinkle  of  lights 
between.  Then  the  hour  struck:  the  bells  rang  — 
hooter,  sirens,  horns,  trumpets  sounded.  The  church 
organ  pealed  out  (reminding  me  of  Hans  Andersen) 
and  an  Australian  called  Coo — ee.  (I  longed  to  reply.) 
I  wanted  L.M.  to  hear  and  to  see.  I  called  loudly  to 
her  ever  so  many  times,  but  she  had  '  chosen  '  to  take 
a  bath.  .  .  . 

May  19.  6  p.m.  I  wish  I  had  some  idea  of  how  old  this 
note  book  is.  The  writing  is  very  faint  and  far  away. 
Now  it  is  May  1919.  Six  o'clock.  I  am  sitting  in  my 
own  room  thinking  of  Mother :  I  want  to  cry.  But  my 
thoughts  are  beautiful  and  full  of  gaiety.  I  think  of 
our  house,  our  garden,  us  children  —  the  lawn,  the 
gate,  and  Mother  coming  in.  "  Children !  Children !  " 
I  really  only  ask  for  time  to  write  it  all  —  time  to  write 
my  books.  Then  I  don't  mind  dying.  I  live  to  write. 
The  lovely  world  (God,  how  lovely  the  external  world 
is!)  is  there  and  I  bathe  in  it  and  am  refreshed.  But 
I  feel  as  though  I  had  a  duty,  someone  has  set  me  a 

=  104  = 


The  Lovely   World 


task  which  I  am  bound  to  finish.  Let  me  finish  it :  let 
me  finish  it  without  hurrying  —  leaving  all  as  fair  as 
I  can. . . . 

My  little  Mother,  my  star,  my  courage,  my  own.  I 
seem  to  dwell  in  her  now.  We  live  in  the  same  world. 
Not  quite  this  world,  not  quite  another.  I  do  not 
care  for  people :  and  the  idea  of  fame,  of  being  a  suc- 
cess,—  that's  nothing,  less  than  nothing.  I  love 
my  family  and  a  few  others  dearly,  and  I  love,  in  the 
old  —  in  the  ancient  way,  through  and  through,  my 
husband. 

Not  a  soul  knows  where  she  is.  She  goes  slowly, 
thinking  it  all  over,  wondering  how  she  can  express  it 
as  she  wants  to  —  asking  for  time  and  for  peace. 

Escape 

She  was  sure  I  would  be  cold  and  as  usual  tried  to 
make  of  my  departure  une  petite  affaire  serieuse.  I 
always  try  to  thieve  out,  steal  out.  I  should  like  to  let 
myself  down  from  a  window,  or  just  withdraw  like  a 
ray  of  light. 

"  Are  you  sure  you  won't  have  your  cape  .  .  .  etc. 
etc.  etc.  ?  " 

Her  attitude  made  me  quite  sure.  I  went  out.  At  the 
corner  the  flying,  gay,  eager  wind  ran  at  me.  It  was 
too  much  to  bear.  I  went  on  for  a  yard  or  two,  shiver- 
ing —  then  I  came  home.  I  slipped  the  Yale  key  into 
the  lock  like  a  thief,  shut  the  door  dead  quiet.  Up  she 
came,  up  the  stairs. 

"  So  it  was  too  cold,  after  all !  " 

=  105  = 


Journal   IQIQ 

I  couldn't  answer  or  even  look  at  her.  I  had  to  turn 
my  back  and  pull  off  my  gloves.  Said  she : 

"  I  have  a  blouse-pattern  here  I  want  to  show 
you." 

At  that  I  crept  upstairs,  came  into  my  room,  and 
shut  the  door.  It  was  a  miracle  she  did  not  follow.  .  .  . 

What  is  there  in  all  this  to  make  me  hate  her  so? 
What  do  you  see?  She  has  known  me  try  to  get  in  and 
out  without  anyone  knowing  it  dozens  of  times  —  that 
is  true.  I  have  even  torn  my  heart  out  and  told  her 
how  it  hurts  my  last  little  defences  to  be  questioned 
—  how  it  makes  me  feel  just  for  the  moment  an  inde- 
pendent being,  to  be  allowed  to  go  and  come  unques- 
tioned. But  that  is  just  "  Katie's  funniness.  She 
doesn't  mean  it,  of  course.  .  .  ." 

We  hardly  spoke  at  lunch.  When  it  was  over  she 
asked  me  again  if  she  might  show  me  the  pattern.  I 
felt  so  ill,  it  seemed  to  me  that  even  a  hen  could  see  at 
a  side  glance  of  its  little  leaden  eye  how  ill  I  felt.  I 
don't  remember  what  I  said.  But  in  she  came  and 
put  before  me  —  something.  Really,  I  hardly  know 
what  it  was.  "  Let  the  little  dressmaker  help  you,"  I 
said.  But  there  was  nothing  to  say. 

She  murmured :  "  Purple  chiffon  front  neck 
sleeves."  I  don't  know.  Finally  I  asked  her  to  take  it 
away. 

"  What  is  it,  Katie?  Am  I  interrupting  your  work?  " 

"Yes,  we'll  call  it  that." 


=  106  = 


Being  Alone 

Being  Alone 
Saturday:  This  joy  of  being  alone.  What  is  it?  I  feel 
so  gay  and  at  peace — the  whole  house  takes  the  air. 
Lunch  is  ready.  I  have  a  baked  egg,  apricots  and 
cream,  cheese  straws  and  black  coffee.  How  delicious ! 
A  baby  meal !  Mother  shares  it  with  me.  Athenaeum  is 
asleep  and  then  awake  on  the  studio  sofa.  He  has  a 
silver  spoon  of  cream  —  then  hides  under  the  sofa 
frill  and  puts  out  a  paw  for  my  finger.  I  gather  the 
dried  leaves  from  the  plant  in  the  big  white  bowl,  and 
because  I  must  play  with  something,  I  take  an  orange 
up  to  my  room  and  throw  it  and  catch  it  as  I  walk 
up  and  down.  .  .  . 

[This  note  appears  later,  re-written,  in  the  following  form.] 

Saturday.  Peaceful  and  gay.  The  whole  house  takes 
the  air.  Athenaeum  is  asleep  and  then  awake  on  the 
studio  sofa.  He  has  a  silver  spoonful  of  my  cream  at 
lunch  time  —  then  hides  under  the  sofa  frill  and  plays 
the  game  of  the  Darting  Paw.  I  gather  the  dried  leaves 
from  the  plant  in  the  big  white  bowl ;  they  are  pow- 
dered with  silver.  There  is  nobody  in  the  house,  and 
yet  whose  is  this  faint  whispering?  On  the  stairs  there 
are  tiny  spots  of  gold  —  tiny  footprints. . . . 

Geraniums 
The  red  geraniums  have  bought  the  garden  over 
my  head.  They  are  there,  established,  back  in  the  old 
home,  every  leaf  and  flower  unpacked  and  in  its  place 

=  107  = 


Journal   1919 

—  and  quite  determined  that  no  power  on  earth  will 
ever  move  them  again.  Well,  that  I  don't  mind.  But 
why  should  they  make  me  feel  a  stranger?  Why  should 
they  ask  me  every  time  I  go  near :  "  And  what  are  you 
doing  in  a  London  garden?  "  They  burn  with  arro- 
gance and  pride.  And  I  am  the  little  Colonial  walking 
in  the  London  garden  patch  —  allowed  to  look,  per- 
haps, but  not  to  linger.  If  I  lie  on  the  grass  they  posi- 
tively shout  at  me:  "  Look  at  her,  lying  on  our  grass, 
pretending  she  lives  here,  pretending  this  her  garden, 
and  that  tall  back  of  the  house,  with  the  windows  open 
and  the  coloured  curtains  lifting,  is  her  house.  She  is 
a  stranger  —  an  alien.  She  is  nothing  but  a  little 
girl  sitting  on  the  Tinakori  hills  and  dreaming :  *  I 
went  to  London  and  married  an  Englishman  and  we 
lived  in  a  tall  grave  house  with  red  geraniums  and 
white  daisies  in  the  garden  at  the  back.'  /w-pudence !  " 

[This  note  appears  later,  re-written,  in  the  following  form.] 

The  red  geraniums  have  bought  the  garden  over  my 
head  and  taken  possession.  They  are  settled  in,  every 
leaf  and  flower  unpacked  and  in  its  place,  and  never 
do  they  mean  to  move  again!  Well  —  that  I  could 
bear.  But  why  because  I've  let  them  in  should  they 
throw  me  out?  They  won't  even  let  me  lie  on  the  grass 
without  their  shouting:  " Tra-pudence !  " 

A  Dream 
Sometimes  I  glance  up  at  the  clock.  Then  I  know  I 
am  expecting  Chummie.  The  bell  peals.  I  run  out  on 

-  108  = 


A  Dream 

to  the  landing.  I  hear  his  hat  and  stick  thrown  on  to 
the  hall-table.  He  runs  up  the  stairs,  three  at  a  time. 
"  Hullo,  darling !  "  But  I  can't  move  —  I  can't  move. 
He  puts  his  arm  round  me,  holding  me  tightly,  and  we 
kiss  —  a  long,  firm,  family  kiss.  And  the  kiss  means : 
We  are  of  the  same  blood;  we  have  absolute  confi- 
dence in  each  other ;  we  love ;  all  is  well ;  nothing  can 
ever  come  between  us. 

We  come  into  my  room.  He  goes  over  to  the  glass. 
"  By  Jove,  I  am  hot."  Yes,  he  is  very  hot.  A  deep 
childish  colour  shows  in  his  cheeks,  his  eyes  are  bril- 
liant, his  lips  burn,  he  strokes  the  hair  back  from  his 
forehead  with  the  palm  of  his  hand.  I  pull  the  curtains 
together  and  the  room  is  shadowy.  He  flings  himself 
down  on  the  sommier  and  lights  a  cigarette,  and 
watches  the  smoke,  rising  so  slowly. 

"Is  that  better?  "  I  ask. 

"Perfect,  darling  —  simply  perfect.  The  light  re- 
minds me  of  .  .  ." 

And  then  the  dream  is  over  and  I  begin  working 
again. 

England 

The  two  brothers  were  on  one  side  of  the  room,  I 
oh  the  other.  R.  sat  on  the  floor  inclined  towards  J. 
J.  lay  on  the  stickle-back,  very  idly. 

"  If  you  could  have  your  wish,  where  would  you 
be?" 

First  he  thought  a  cafe  in  some  foreign  town  ...  in 
Spain  . .  .  no,  in  Grenoble,  perhaps  .  .  .  sitting  listening 
to  music  and  watching  the  people.  We  are  just  passing 

=  109  = 


Journal   1919 

through.  .  .  .  There  is  a  lake  arid  a  river  near.  .  .  .  But 
then,  no.  A  farmhouse  in  Sussex  —  some  good  old 
furniture  —  knocking  about  in  the  garden  —  rolling 
the  lawn,  perhaps  —  yes,  rolling  the  lawn.  An  infant 

—  two  good  servants.  And  then,  when  it  grew  dark  — 
to  go  in,  have  some  milk,  then  I  go  to  my  study  and 
you  to  yours  and  work  for  about  an  hour  and  a  half 
and  then  trundle  off  to  bed.  I  would  like  to  earn  my 
living,  but  not  by  writing.  I  feel  that  my  talent  as  a 
writer  isn't  a  great  one  —  I'll  have  to  be  careful  of 
it.  .  .  .  Yes,  that's  what  I'd  like.  No  new  places  —  no 
new  things.  I  don't  want  them.  Would  you  like 
that? 

I  felt  his  brother  was  with  him,  the  brother  inclined 
towards  him,  understanding  and  sharing  that  life  — 
the  homestead  on  the  Downs  —  his  English  country 

—  the  sober  quiet.  .  .  . 
"Would  you  like  that?" 

No,  I  don't  want  that.  No,  I  don't  want  England. 
England  is  of  no  use  to  me.  What  do  I  mean  by  that? 
I  mean  there  never  has  been  —  never  will  be  —  any 
rapprochement  between  us,  never.  .  .  .  The  lack  of  its 
appeal  —  that  is  what  I  chiefly  hate.  I  would  not  care 
if  I  never  saw  the  English  country  again.  Even  in  its 
flowering  I  feel  deeply  antagonistic  to  it,  and  I  will 
never  change. 

A  Good  Beginning 

May  30.  First  comes  L.M.  I  give  her  orders.  Ask  her 
to  supervise  the  maid  till  Monday.  '  Be  gentle  with 
her:  help  her  to  make  the  beds ;  and  just  tell  her  how 

=  110  = 


A   Good  B e ginning 


everything  must  be.'  Then  in  detail  I  sketch  out  the 
maid's  programme.  *  Send  Ralph,  please.'  Ralph  ar- 
rives. I  arrange  the  food.  Then  settle  all  that  must  be 
done,  coercing  Ralph,  putting  her  mind  in  order  if  I 
can,  making  her  see  the  bright  side  of  things,  sending 
her  away  (I  hope)  feeling  important  and  happy. 

I  go  upstairs  to  see  Maud,  to  say  good-morning,  to 
hope  '  she  will  be  happy.'  "  Just  take  things  gently;  I'll 
quite  understand  that  you  can't  get  into  our  ways  at 
once.  Ask  Miss  B.  and  the  cook  for  what  you  want. 
But  if  you  wish  to  see  me,  don't  hesitate  to  come  in. 
I  was  so  glad  you  were  early."  She  was  very  reassured. 
Her  eyes  shone  (she's  only  a  little  girl).  She  said  it 
was  like  the  country.  As  she  walked  up  from  the  tram 
the  birds  sang  "  something  beautiful."  This  instead 
of  the  '  long  drag  up  the  hill '  was  cheering.  I  left  her 
happy.  I  know  I  did. 

Downstairs  just  to  say  Good-day  to  Mrs.  Moody 
and  to  say  there  were  some  flowers  for  her  to  take 
home.  The  good  creature  was  on  her  knees  polishing 
and  saying  it  was  such  a  fine  day.  Bless  her  60  years ! 
We  had  a  little  joke  or  two  and  I  came  away. 

L.M.  again  —  just  for  a  moment  to  say:  "As  you 
have  a  machine,  don't  hem  dusters  by  hand  as  I  see 
you  are  doing.  Keep  your  energies  for  something 
important!  " 

Then  I  sit  down  to  work,  and  there  comes  a  steady, 
pleasant  vibration  from  the  ship.  If  only  I  could  al- 
ways control  these  four  women  like  this !  I  must  learn 
to. 

=  in  = 


Journal   1919 

May  31.  Work.  Shall  I  be  able  to  express  one  day  my 
love  of  work  —  my  desire  to  be  a  better  writer  —  my 
longing  to  take  greater  pains.  And  the  passion  I  feel.  It 
takes  the  place  of  religion  —  it  is  my  religion  —  of 
people  —  I  create  my  people :  of  '  life  '  —  it  is  Life. 
The  temptation  is  to  kneel  before  it,  to  adore,  to  pros- 
trate myself,  to  stay  too  long  in  a  state  of  ecstasy  be- 
fore the  idea  of  it.  I  must  be  more  busy  about  my 
master's  business. 

Oh,  God !  The  sky  is  filled  with  the  sun,  and  the  sun 
is  like  music.  The  sky  is  full  of  music.  Music  comes 
streaming  down  these  great  beams.  The  wind  touches 
the  harp-like  trees,  shakes  little  jets  of  music  —  little 
shakes,  little  trills  from  the  flowers.  The  shape  of  every 
flower  is  like  a  sound.  My  hands  open  like  Ave  petals. 
Praise  Him!  Praise  Him!  No,  I  am  overcome;  I  am 
dazed ;  it  is  too  much  to  bear. 

A  little  fly  has  dropped  by  mistake  into  the  huge 
sweet  cup  of  a  magnolia.  Isaiah  (or  was  it  Elisha?) 
was  caught  up  into  Heaven  in  a  chariot  of  fire  once. 
But  when  the  weather  is  divine  and  I  am  free  to  work, 
such  a  journey  is  positively  nothing. 

The  Angel  of  Mercy 
May.  The  day  the  housemaid  had  to  leave  because 
her  husband  '  didn't  want  her  to  work  no  more '  and, 
to  consolidate  his  authority,  had  punched  her  so  hard 
in  the  neck  that  she  had  a  great  red  swelling  under  ear, 
the  cook  became  a  kind  of  infallible  being,  —  an  angel 
of  mercy.  Nothing  was  too  much  for  her.  Stairs  were 

=  112  = 


The   Cook 


rays  of  light  up  which  she  floated.  She  wore  her  cap 
differently :  it  gave  her  the  air  of  a  hospital  nurse.  Her 
voice  changed.  She  suggested  puddings  as  though  they 
were  compresses :  whiting,  because  they  were  so  '  deli- 
cate and  harmless.'  Trust  me!  Lean  on  me!  There  is 
nothing  I  cannot  do !  was  her  attitude.  Every  time  she 
left  me,  she  left  me  for  her  mysterious  reasons  —  to 
lay  out  the  body  again  and  again  —  to  change  the  stiff- 
ened hand — to  pull  the  paper  frill  over  the  ominous 
spot  appearing. 

The  Cook 

The  cook  is  evil.  After  lunch  I  trembled  so  that  I 
had  to  lie  down  on  the  sommier  —  thinking  about  her. 
I  meant  —  when  she  came  up  to  see  me  —  to  say  so 
much  that  she'd  have  to  go.  I  waited,  playing  with  the 
wild  kitten.  When  she  came,  I  said  it  all,  and  more, 
and  she  said  how  sorry  she  was  and  agreed  and  apolo- 
gised and  quite  understood.  She  stayed  at  the  door, 
plucking  at  a  d'oyley.  "  Well,  I'll  see  it  doesn't  happen 
in  future.  I  quite  see  what  you  mean." 

So  the  serpent  still  slept  between  us.  Oh !  why  won't 
she  turn  and  speak  her  mind.  This  pretence  of  being 
fond  of  me!  I  believe  she  thinks  she  is.  There  is  some- 
thing in  what  L.M.  says :  she  is  not  consciously  evil. 
She  is  a  fool,  of  course.  I  have  to  do  all  the  managing 
and  all  the  explaining.  I  have  to  cook  everything  be- 
fore she  cooks  it.  I  believe  she  thinks  she  is  a  treasure 
. . .  no,  wants  to  think  it.  At  bottom  she  knows  her  cor- 
ruptness. There  are  moments  when  it  comes  to  the 
surface,  comes  out,  like  a  stain,  in  her  face.  Then  her 

=  113  = 


Journal  igiQ 

eyes  are  like  the  eyes  of  a  woman-prisoner  —  a  crea- 
ture looking  up  as  you  enter  her  cell  and  saying:  'If 
you'd  known  what  a  hard  life  I've  had  you  wouldn't 
be  surprised  to  see  me  here.' 

[This  appears  again  in  the  following  form.] 

Cook  to  See  Me 

As  I  opened  the  door,  I  saw  her  sitting  in  the  middle 
of  the  room,  hunched,  still.  .  .  .  She  got  up,  obedient, 
like  a  prisoner  when  you  enter  a  cell.  And  her  eyes 
said,  as  a  prisoner's  eyes  say,  "  Knowing  the  life  I've 
had,  I'm  the  last  to  be  surprised  at  finding  myself 
here." 

The  Cook's  Story 

Her  first  husband  was  a  pawnbroker.  He  learned  his 
trade  from  her  uncle,  with  whom  she  lived,  and  was 
more  like  her  big  brother  than  anything  else  from  the 
age  of  thirteen.  After  he  had  married  her  they  pros- 
pered. He  made  a  perfect  pet  of  her  —  they  used  to 
say.  His  sisters  put  it  that  he  made  a  perfect  fool  of 
himself  over  her.  When  their  children  were  fifteen  and 
nine  he  urged  his  employers  to  take  a  man  into  their 
firm  —  a  great  friend  of  his  —  and  persuaded  them ; 
really  went  security  for  this  man.  When  she  saw  the 
man  she  went  all  over  cold.  She  said,  Mark  me,  you've 
not  done  right:  no  good  will  come  of  this.  But  he 
laughed  it  off.  Time  passed:  the  man  proved  a  villain. 
When  they  came  to  take  stock,  they  found  all  the 
stock  was  false :  he'd  sold  everything.  This  preyed  on 

=  114  - 


The   Cook's  Story 

her  husband's  mind,  went  on  preying,  kept  him  up  at 
night,  made  a  changed  man  of  him,  he  went  mad  as 
you  might  say  over  figures,  worrying.  One  evening, 
sitting  in  his  chair,  very  late,  he  died  of  a  clot  of  blood 
on  the  brain. 

She  was  left.  Her  big  boy  was  old  enough  to  go  out, 
but  the  little  one  was  still  not  more  than  a  baby :  he 
was  so  nervous  and  delicate.  The  doctors  had  never 
let  him  go  to  school. 

One  day  her  brother-in-law  came  to  see  her  and 
advised  her  to  sell  up  her  home  and  get  some  work. 
All  that  keeps  you  back,  he  said,  is  little  Bert.  Now, 
I'd  advise  you  to  place  a  certain  sum  with  your  solici- 
tor for  him  and  put  him  out  —  in  the  country.  He  said 
he'd  take  him.  I  did  as  he  advised.  But,  funny!  I 
never  heard  a  word  from  the  child  after  he'd  gone.  I 
used  to  ask  why  he  didn't  write,  and  they  said,  when 
he  can  write  a  decent  letter  you  shall  have  it  —  not  be- 
fore. That  went  on  for  a  twelvemonth,  and  I  found 
afterwards  he'd  been  writing  all  the  time,  grieving  to 
be  took  away,  and  they'd  never  sent  his  letters.  Then 
quite  sudden  his  uncle  wrote  and  said  he  must  be 
taken  away.  He'd  done  the  most  awful  things  — 
things  I  couldn't  find  you  a  name  for — he'd  turned 
vicious  —  he  was  a  little  criminal!  What  his  uncle 
said  was  I'd  spoiled  the  child  and  he  was  going  to 
make  a  man  of  him,  and  he'd  beaten  him  and  half 
starved  him  and  when  he  was  frightened  at  night  and 
screamed,  he  turned  him  out  into  the  New  Forest  and 
made  him  sleep  under  the  branches.  My  big  boy  went 

=  "5  = 


Journal   1919 

down  to  see  him.  Mother,  he  says,  you  wouldn't  know 
little  Bert.  He  can't  speak.  He  won't  come  near  any- 
body. He  starts  off  if  you  touch  him ;  he's  like  a  little 
beast.  And,  oh  dear,  the  things  he'd  done !  Well,  you 
hear  of  people  doing  those  things  before  they're  put 
into  orphanages.  But  when  I  heard  that  and  thought 
it  was  the  same  little  baby  his  father  used  to  carry  into 
Regent's  Park  bathed  and  dressed  of  a  Sunday  morn- 
ing —  well,  I  felt  my  religion  was  going  from  me. 

I  had  a  terrible  time  trying  to  get  him  into  an  or- 
phanage. I  begged  for  three  months  before  they  would 
take  him.  Then  he  was  sent  to  Bisley.  But  after  I'd 
been  to  see  him  there,  in  his  funny  clothes  and  all  —  I 
could  see  'is  misery.  I  was  in  a  nice  place  at  the  time, 
cook  to  a  butcher  in  a  large  way  in  Kensington,  but 
that  poor  child's  eyes  —  they  used  to  follow  me  —  and 
a  sort  of  shivering  that  came  over  him  when  people 
went  near. 

Well,  I  had  a  friend  that  kept  a  boarding  house  in 
Kensington.  I  used  to  visit  her,  and  a  friend  of  hers, 
a  big  well-set-up  fellow,  quite  the  gentleman,  an  engi- 
neer who  worked  in  a  garage,  came  there  very  often. 
She  used  to  joke  and  say  he  wanted  to  walk  me  out. 
I  laughed  it  off  till  one  day  she  was  very  serious.  She 
said,  You're  a  very  silly  woman.  He  earns  good 
money ;  he'd  give  you  a  home  and  you  could  have  your 
little  boy.  Well,  he  was  to  speak  to  me  next  day  and 
I  made  up  my  mind  to  listen.  Well,  he  did,  and  he 
couldn't  have  put  it  nicer.  I  can't  give  you  a  house  to 
start  with,  he  said,  but  you  shall  have  three  good  rooms 

-  116  = 


The   Cook's  Story 


and  the  kid,  and  I'm  earning  good  money  and  shall  be 
more. 

A  week  after,  he  come  to  me.  I  can't  give  you  any 
money  this  week,  he  says,  there's  things  to  pay  for 
from  when  I  was  single.  But  I  daresay  you've  got  a 
bit  put  by.  And  I  was  a  fool,  you  know,  I  didn't  think 
it  funny.  Oh  yes,  I  said,  I'll  manage.  Well,  so  it  went 
on  for  three  weeks.  We'd  arranged  not  to  have  little 
Bert  for  a  month  because,  he  said,  he  wanted  me  to 
himself,  and  he  was  so  fond  of  him.  A  big  fellow,  he 
used  to  cling  to  me  like  a  child  and  call  me  mother. 

After  three  weeks  was  up  I  hadn't  a  penny.  I'd  been 
taking  my  jewels  and  best  clothes  to  put  away  to  pay 
for  him  until  he  was  straight.  But  one  night  I  said, 
Where's  my  money?  He  just  up  and  gave  me  such  a 
smack  in  the  face  I  thought  my  head  would  burst.  And 
that  began  it.  Every  time  I  asked  him  for  money  he 
beat  me.  As  I  said,  I  was  very  religious  at  the  time, 
used  to  wear  a  crucifix  under  my  clothes  and  couldn't 
go  to  bed  without  kneeling  by  the  side  and  saying  my 
prayers  —  no,  not  even  the  first  week  of  my  marriage. 
Well,  I  went  to  a  clergyman  and  told  him  everything 
and  he  said,  My  child,  he  said,  I  am  very  sorry  for 
you,  but  with  God's  help,  he  said,  it's  your  duty  to 
make  him  a  better  man.  You  say  your  first  husband 
was  so  good.  Well,  perhaps  God  has  kept  this  trial  for 
you  until  now.  I  went  home  —  and  that  very  night  he 
tore  my  crucifix  off  and  hit  me  on  the  head  when  I 
knelt  down.  He  said  he  wouldn't  have  me  say  my 
prayers;  it  made  him  wild.  I  had  a  little  dog  at  the 

=  117  = 


Journal   1919 

time  I  was  very  fond  of,  and  he  used  to  pick  it  up  and 
shout,  I'll  teach  it  to  say  its  prayers,  and  beat  it  before 
my  eyes  —  until  —  well,  such  was  the  man  he  was. 

Then  one  night  he  came  in  the  worse  for  drink  and 
fouled  the  bed.  I  couldn't  stand  it.  I  began  to  cry.  He 
gave  me  a  hit  on  the  ear  and  I  fell  down,  striking  my 
head  on  the  fender.  When  I  came  to,  he  was  gone.  I 
ran  out  into  the  street  just  as  I  was — I  ran  as  fast 
as  I  could,  not  knowing  where  I  was  going  —  just 
dazed  —  my  nerves  were  gone.  And  a  lady  found  me 
and  took  me  to  her  home  and  I  was  there  three  weeks. 
And  after  that  I  never  went  back.  I  never  even  told  my 
people.  I  found  work,  and  not  till  months  after  I  went 
to  see  my  sister.  Good  gracious!  she  says,  we  all 
thought  you  was  murdered!  And  I  never  see  him 
since.  .  .  . 

Those  were  dreadful  times.  I  was  so  ill,  I  could 
scarcely  hardly  work  and  of  course  I  couldn't  get  my 
little  boy  out.  He  had  to  grow  up  in  it.  And  so  I  had 
to  start  all  over  again.  I  had  nothing  of  his,  nothing  of 
mine.  I  lost  it  all  except  my  marriage  lines.  Somehow 
I  remembered  them  just  as  I  was  running  out  that 
night  and  put  them  in  my  boddy  —  sort  of  an  instinct 
as  you  might  say. 

J.  digs  the  garden  as  though  he  were  exhuming  a 
hated  body  or  making  a  hole  for  a  loved  one. 

The  ardent  creature  spent  more  than  half  her  time 
in  church  praying  to  be  delivered  from  temptation. 
But  God  grew  impatient  at  last  and  caused  the  door 

=  118  = 


Wingley 

to  be  shut  against  her.  "  For  Heaven's  sake,"  said  he, 
"  give  the  temptation  a  chance !  " 

It's  raining,  but  the  air  is  soft,  smoky,  warm.  Big 
drops  patter  on  the  languid  leaves,  the  tobacco  flowers 
lean  over.  Now  there  is  a  rustle  in  the  ivy.  Wingley  has 
appeared  from  the  garden  next  door;  he  bounds  from 
the  wall.  And  delicately,  lifting  his  paws,  pointing  his 
ears,  very  afraid  that  big  wave  will  overtake  him,  he 
wades  over  the  lake  of  green  grass. 

"Mr.  Despondency's  daughter,  Muchafraid,  went 
through  the  water  singing." 

She  said :  "  I  don't  feel  in  the  least  afraid.  I  feel  like 
a  little  rock  that  the  rising  tide  is  going  to  cover.  You 
won't  be  able  to  see  me  .  .  .  big  waves  .  .  .  but  they'll 
go  down  again.  I  shall  be  there  —  winking  bright." 

Oh,  what  sentimental  toshery ! 

June  10.  I  have  discovered  that  I  cannot  burn  the 
candle  at  one  end  and  write  a  book  with  the  other. 

Life  without  work  —  I  would  commit  suicide. 
Therefore  work  is  more  important  than  life. 

June  21.  Bateson  and  his  love  of  the  louse  for  its  own 
sake.  Pedigree  lice.  £  ioo  a  year  from  the  Royal  In- 
stitute: a  large  family:  desperately  poor:  but  he  never 
notices.  The  lives  he  saved  in  the  Balkan  war  with 
shaving  and  Thymol.  Cases  reduced  from  7000  to  700. 
No  reward,  not  even  an  O.B.E.  He  dissects  them, 

=  119  = 


Journal   1919 

finds  their  glands  and  so  on,  keeps  them  in  tiny  boxes ; 
they  feed  on  his  arm.  The  louse  and  the  bedbug. 

Hydatids:  the  Australian  who  got  them:  handfuls 
of  immature  grapes.  They  attack  the  liver.  In  the  hu- 
man body  they  reproduce  indefinitely.  When  they  are 
passed  and  a  sheep  is  attacked  by  them,  they  develop 
hooks  and  become  long  worms. 

The  Egyptian  disease:  a  parasite  which  attacks  the 
veins  and  arteries  and  causes  fluxion  —  constant 
bleeding.  It  is  another  egg  drunk  in  water.  After  it  has 
been  in  man  the  only  thing  it  can  affect  is  a  water- 
snail.  It  goes  through  an  entirely  new  cycle  of  being 
until  it  can  attack  man  again.  Dysentery :  another 
parasite. 

Hydrophobia:  the  virus  from  the  dog  is  taken  and  a 
rabbit  is  infected.  That  rabbit  is  used  to  infect  another 
rabbit :  the  2nd  a  3rd,  and  so  on,  until  you  get  a  rabbit 
who  is  practically  pure  virus.  The  spinal  cords  are 
then  taken  from  these  rabbits  and  dried  by  a  vacuum. 
The  result  is  pounded  up  fine  into  an  emulsion:  1st 
rabbit,  2nd  rabbit,  3rd  rabbit,  etc.,  and  the  patient  is 
injected  progressively  till  at  last  he  receives  a  dose 
which,  if  he  had  not  been  prepared  to  resist  it,  would 
kill  him  outright.  The  disease  develops  very  slowly; 
the  treatment  is  very  expensive.  Symptoms  are  a  pro- 
fuse shiny  bubbling  saliva,  and  gasping  and  groaning 
as  in  gas-poisoning.  No  barking,  no  going  on  all  fours. 

In  lockjaw  the  jaw  does  not  lock. 

Pasteur  was  a  very  dreamer  of  dreamers.  Human 
beings  are  a  side-line  to  science. 

=  120  = 


The  Larger  Breath 


All  this  I  talked  over  with  Sorapure,  June  21.  His 
point  of  view  about  medicine  seems  to  me  just  com- 
pletely right.  I'd  willingly  let  him  take  off  my  head, 
look  inside,  and  pop  it  on  again,  if  he  thought  it  might 
assist  future  generations.  Quite  the  right  man  to  have 
at  one's  dying  bedside.  He'd  get  me  at  any  rate  so  in- 
terested in  the  process  —  gradual  loss  of  sensitiveness, 
coldness  in  the  joints,  etc.  —  I'd  lie  there  thinking: 
this  is  very  valuable  to  know ;  I  must  make  a  note  of 
this. 

As  he  stood  at  the  door  talking :  "  Nothing  is  in- 
curable; it's  all  a  question  of  time.  What  seems  so 
useless  to-day  may  be  just  that  link  which  will  make 
all  plain  to  a  future  generation.  ..."  I  had  a  sense  of 
the  larger  breath,  of  the  mysterious  lives  within  lives, 
and  the  Egyptian  parasite  beginning  its  new  cycle  of 
being  in  a  water-snail  affected  me  like  a  great  work  of 
art.  No,  that's  not  what  I  mean.  It  made  me  feel  how 
perfect  the  world  is,  with  its  worms  and  hooks  and 
ova,  how  incredibly  perfect.  There  is  the  sky  and  the 
sea  and  the  shape  of  a  lily,  and  there  is  all  this  other 
as  well.  The  balance  how  perfect!  (Salut,  Tchehov!) 
I  would  not  have  the  one  without  the  other. 

The  clocks  are  striking  ten.  Here  in  my  room  the 
sky  looks  lilac ;  in  the  bath-room  it  is  like  the  skin  of 
a  peach.  Girls  are  laughing. 

I  have  consumption.  There  is  still  a  great  deal  of 
moisture  (and  pain)  in  my  bad  lung.  But  I  do  not 
care.  I  do  not  want  anything  I  could  not  have.  Peace, 
solitude,  time  to  write  my  books,  beautiful  external 

=   121    = 


Journal   1019 

life  to  watch  and  ponder  —  no  more.  O,  I'd  like  a  child 
as  well  —  a  baby  boy;  mats  je  demande  trop! 

[Part  of  this  note  appears  again  in  the  following  form.] 

As  he  stood  at  the  door  he  said  quietly,  "  Nothing 
is  incurable.  What  seems  so  useless  to-day  may  be  the 
link  that  will  make  all  plain  to-morrow."  We  had  been 
discussing  hydatids,  the  Egyptian  parasite  that  begins 
its  cycle  of  existence  being  in  a  water-snail  and  the 
effects  of  hydrophobia.  He  smiled  gently.  There  was 
nothing  to  be  alarmed  or  shocked  or  surprised  at.  It 
was  all  a  question  of  knowing  these  things  as  they 
should  be  known  and  not  otherwise.  But  he  said  none 
of  this  and  went  off  to  his  next  case.  .  .  . 

At  breakfast  time  a  mosquito  and  a  wasp  came  to 
the  edge  of  the  honey  dish  to  drink.  The  mosquito  was 
a  lovely  little  high  stepping  gazelle,  but  the  wasp  was 
a  fierce  roaring  tiger.  Drink,  my  darlings ! 

When  the  coffee  is  cold  L.M.  says:  These  things 
have  to  happen  sometimes.  And  she  looks  mysterious 
and  important,  as  if,  as  a  matter  of  fact  she  had  known 
all  along  that  this  was  a  cold  coffee  day. 

What  I  felt  was,  he  said,  that  I  wasn't  in  the  whole 
of  myself  at  all.  I'd  got  locked  in,  somehow,  in  some 
little  .  .  .  top  room  in  my  mind,  and  strangers  had  got 
in  —  people  I'd  never  seen  before  were  making  free  of 
the  rest  of  it.  There  was  a  dreadful  feeling  of  con- 
fusion, chiefly  that,  and  . . .  vague  noises  —  like  things 
being  moved  —  changed  about  —  in  my  head.  I  lit 

=  122  = 


Second   V ioli 


n 


the  candle  and  sat  up  and  in  the  mirror  I  saw  a  dark, 
brooding,  strangely  lengthened  face. 

"  The  feeling  roused  by  the  cause  is  more  important 
than  the  cause  itself.  .  .  ."  That  is  the  kind  of  thing  I 
like  to  say  to  myself  as  I  get  into  the  train.  And  then, 
as  one  settles  into  the  corner  —  "  For  example  "  — 
or  "  Take  —  for  instance  .  .  ."  It's  a  good  game  for 
one. 

She  fastens  on  a  white  veil  and  hardly  knows  her- 
self. Is  it  becoming  or  is  it  not  becoming?  Ah,  who  is 
there  to  say.  There  is  a  lace  butterfly  on  her  left  cheek 
and  a  spray  of  flowers  on  her  right.  Two  dark  bold 
eyes  stare  through  the  mesh  —  Surely  not  hers.  Her 
lips  tremble ;  faint,  she  sinks  on  her  bed.  And  now  she 
doesn't  want  to  go.  Must  she?  She  is  being  driven  out 
of  the  flat  by  those  bold  eyes.  Out  you  go.  Ah,  how 
cruel!  (Second  Violin.) 

But  her  hand  is  large  and  cold  with  big  knuckles 
and  short  square  nails.  It  is  not  a  little  velvet  hand 
that  sighs,  that  yields  —  faints  dead  away  and  has  to 
be  revived  again  only  to  faint  once  more.  {S.V.) 

What  do  I  want?  she  thought.  What  do  I  really 
want  more  than  anything  else  in  the  world?  If  I  had  a 
wishing  ring  or  Ali  Baba's  lamp  —  no,  it  wasn't  Ali 
Baba  —  it  was  —  Oh,  what  did  it  matter !  Just  sup- 
posing some  one  came.  ..."  I  am  here  to  grant  your 
dearest  wish."  And  she  saw,  vaguely,  a  fluffy  little 
creature  with  a  silver  paper  star  on  a  wand  —  a  school 

=  123  = 


Journal   IQIQ 

fairy.  .  .  .  What  should  I  say?  It  was  cold  in  the 
kitchen,  cold  and  dim.  The  tap  dripped  slowly,  as  tho' 
the  water  were  half  frozen.  .  .  .  (S.F.) 

Miss  Todd  and  Miss  Hopper  were  second  violins. 
Miss  Bray  was  a  viola. 

Midday  strikes  on  various  bells  —  some  velvety 
soft,  some  languid,  some  regretful,  and  one  impatient 

—  a  youthful  bell  ringing  high  and  quick  above  the 
rest.  He  thought  joyfully:  That's  the  bell  for  me!  .  .  . 

Cinderella 
Oh,  my  sisters  —  my  beautiful  Peacock-proud  sisters 

—  have  pity  on  me  as  I  sit  with  my  little  broom  beside 
the  cold  ashes  while  you  dance  at  the  Prince's  party. 
But  why  —  is  the  Fairy  Godmother,  the  coach,  the 
plumes  and  glass  slippers  just  —  faery  —  and  all  the 
rest  of  the  story  deeply,  deeply  true?  Fate  I  suppose 

—  Fate.  It  had  to  be.  These  things  happen  so.  La 
reponse :  Poor  old  girl  —  of  course  she  is  awfully  sorry 
for  her,  but  she  does  become  a  bore  —  doesn't  she? 
There's  no  getting  away  from  it. 

When  they  got  into  bed  together  her  feet  rushed 
to  greet  his  like  little  puppies  that  had  been  separated 
all  day  from  their  brothers.  And  first  they  chased  one 
another  and  played  and  nudged  gently.  But  then,  they 
settled  down,  curled  up,  twined  together  under  the 
clothes  (like  puppies  on  a  warm  hearth  rug)  and 
went  to  sleep. 

=  124  = 


Two   Climate s 


Dark  Bogey  is  a  little  inclined  to  jump  into  the  milk 
jug  to  rescue  the  fly. 

Fairylike,  the  fire  rose  in  two  branched  flames  like 
the  golden  antlers  of  some  enchanted  stag. 

So  he  sat  there,  burning  the  letters,  and  each  time 
he  cast  a  fresh  packet  on  the  flame,  his  shadow,  im- 
mense, huge,  leapt  out  of  the  wall  opposite  him.  It 
looked,  sitting  so  stiff  and  straight,  like  some  horrible 
old  god,  toasting  his  knees  at  the  flames  of  the  sac- 
rifice. 

Two  Climates 

I'd  always  rather  be  in  a  place  that  is  too  hot  rather 
than  one  that's  too  cold.  But  I'd  always  rather  be  with 
people  who  loved  me  too  little  rather  than  with  people 
who  loved  me  too  much. 

"  She  has  made  her  bed,"  said  Belle  —  "  she  must 
lie  on  it."  I  reflected  thankfully  that  in  this  case 
that  would  be  no  hardship  —  on  the  contrary,  in- 
deed. I  hoped  it  was  what  they  were  both  longing  to 
do.... 

North  Africa.  The  whole  valley  is  smothered  in 
little  white  lilies.  You  never  saw  such  a  sight!  They 
make  me  feel  so  wretchedly  homesick.  They  smell  just 
like  dear  old  Self  ridge's. 

Souvent  j'ai  dit  a  mon  mari:  Nous  en  prenons  un? 
Et  il  me  dit :  Ah,  non,  non,  ma  pauvre  f emme.  Notre 
petit  moment  pour  jouer  est  passe.  Je  ne  peux  rien 
faire  que  de  rester  dans  un  chaise  en  faisant  des  gri- 

=  125  = 


Journal   iqiq 

maces,  et  ca  fait  trembler  plus  que  ga  ne  fait  rire  un 
petit  enfant. 

When  I  read  Dr.  Johnson,  I  feel  like  a  little  girl 
sitting  at  the  same  table.  My  eyes  grow  round.  I  don't 
only  listen ;  I  take  him  in  immensely. 

"  Don't  you  think  it  would  be  marvellous,"  she  said, 
"  to  have  just  one  person  in  one's  life  to  whom  one 
could  tell  everything?  "  She  leant  forward,  put  down 
her  cup,  but  stayed  bent  forward  touching  the  spoon 
against  the  saucer.  She  looked  up  —  "Or  is  it  just 
childish  of  me  —  just  absurd  to  want  such  a  thing? 
. . .  All  the  same,"  she  leaned  back,  smiling,  "  childish 
or  not  —  how  wonderful  it  would  be  —  how  wonder- 
ful !  to  feel  —  from  this  person,  this  one  person  —  I 
really  don't  need  to  hide  anything.  It  would  be  such 
heavenly  happiness !  "  she  cried,  suddenly,  "  it  would 
make  life  so  .  .  ."  she  got  up,  went  to  the  window, 
looked  out  vaguely  and  turned  round  again.  She 
laughed.  "  It's  a  queer  thing,"  she  said,  "  I've  always 
believed  in  the  possibility  —  and  yet  —  in  reality  .  .  . 
Take  R.  and  me,  for  instance."  And  here  she  flung 
back  in  a  chair  and  leant  back,  still  she  was  laughing 
but  her  body  leaned  to  the  chair  as  though  exhausted. 
"  I  tell  him  everything.  You  know  we're  .  .  .  rather 
different  from  most  people.  What  I  mean  is  —  don't 
laugh  —  we  love  each  other  simply  tremendously  — 
we're  everything  to  each  other !  In  fact  he's  the  one 
person  on  earth  for  me  —  and  yet,"  and  she  shut  her 
eyes  and  bit  her  lip  as  though  she  wanted  to  stop 

=  126  = 


Indoo    Weather 


laughing  herself:  "try,  try,  try  as  I  can  —  there's  al- 
ways just  one  secret  —  just  one  —  that  never  can  be 
told  —  that  mocks  me."  And  then  for  a  moment  she 
lay  still.  . . . 

Indoo  Weather:  A  Dream 

"  It's  what  you  might  call  indoo  weather,"  said  the 
little  man. 

"  Oh,  really.  .  .  .  Why  that?  "  said  I,  vaguely. 

He  did  not  answer.  The  two  polished  knobs  of  his 
behind  shone  as  he  leaned  over  feeding  the  black 
seams  of  the  boat  with  a  brown  twist. 

The  day  was  dull,  steaming;  there  was  a  blackness 
out  at  sea ;  the  heavy  waves  came  tolling.  On  the  sea 
grasses  the  large  bright  dew  fell  not.  The  little  man's 
hammer  went  tap-tap. 

L.M.  snorted,  threw  up  her  head,  stamped  her  feet 
on  the  wet  sand,  scrambled  to  a  boulder,  tore  at  some 
sea-poppies,  dug  them  in  her  hat,  held  the  hat  away, 
looked,  scornful,  wrenched  them  out  again. 

I  looked  and  felt  vague  as  a  king. 

"  Spades  and  buckets  is  round  the  point  with  the 
lobster  catch."  The  hammer  tapped.  He  explained 
that  all  the  lovers  would  be  sent  away  alive  in  sacks  if 
they  were  not  given  a  sharp  stang  with  one  of  these. 
It  was  an  ordinary  grey  and  red  garden  trowel.  L.M. 
went  off  to  save  their  lives,  but  not  joyfully.  She 
walked  heavy,  her  head  down,  beating  the  trowel 
against  her  side. 

We  were  alone.  The  watcher  appeared.  He  stood  al- 
ways in  profile,  his  felt  hat  turned  up  at  the  side,  a 

=  127  = 


Journal   igig 

patch  on  the  eye  nearest  us.  His  curved  pipe  fell  from 
his  jaws. 

"  Hi,  Missy,"  he  shouted  to  me.  "  Why  don't  you 
give  us  a  bit  of  a  show  out  there?  " 

The  little  man  remonstrated.  The  sea  was  like  a 
mass  of  half-set  jelly.  On  the  horizon  it  seemed  ages 
fell. 

"  Come  on,  Missy !  "  bawled  the  watcher.  I  took 
off  my  clothes,  stepped  to  the  edge  and  was  drawn  in. 
I  tried  to  catch  the  stumps  of  an  old  wharf,  but  slime 
filled  my  nails  and  I  was  sucked  out.  They  watched. 

Suddenly  there  came,  winnowing  landward,  an 
enormous  skinny  skeleton  of  a  Hindoo,  standing  up- 
right. A  tattered  pink  and  white  print  coat  flapped 
about  his  stiff  outstretched  arms.  He  had  cloth  of  the 
same  with  a  fringe  of  spangles  over  his  head.  He  stood 
upright  because  of  the  immense  sweeping  broom  of 
wood  growing  waist-high.  "  Help !  Help !  "  I  called. 

The  noise  of  the  hammer  came,  and  I  felt  the  watch- 
er's patched  profile.  A  huge  unbreakable  wave  lifted 
him,  tipped  him  near.  His  shadow  lay  even,  on  the 
surface  of  the  dusty  water  —  a  squat  head  and  two 
giant  arms.  It  broadened  into  a  smile. 

Strangers 
I  saw  S.  as  a  little  fair  man  with  a  walrous  mous- 
tache, a  bowler  much  too  small  for  him  and  an  ancient 
frock  coat  that  he  keeps  buttoning  and  unbuttoning. 
D.B.  saw  him  as  a  grave  gentleman  with  big  black 
whiskers.  Anyhow,  there  he  was  at  the  end  of  a  dark 

=  128  - 


Strangers 

tunnel,  either  coming  towards  us  or  walking  away. .  .  . 
That  started  us  on  a  fascinating  subject.  There  are  the 
people  in  D.B.'s  life  I've  never  seen  (very  few)  and 
the  immense  number  in  mine  that  he  has  only  heard 
of.  What  did  they  look  like  to  us  ?  And  then,  before  we 
meet  anyone  while  they  are  still  far  too  far  off  to  be 
seen  we  begin  to  build  an  image.  .  .  .  how  true  is  it? 
It's  queer  how  well  one  gets  to  know  this  stranger; 
how  often  you've  watched  him  before  the  other  comes 
to  take  his  place. ...  I  can  even  imagine  someone  keep- 
ing their  "  first  impression  "  —  in  spite  of  the  other. 


July 


Tedious  Brief  Adventure  of  K.M. 

A  Doctor  who  came  from  Jamaica 

Said:  "This  time  I'll  mend  her  or  break  her. 

I'll  plug  her  with  serum; 

And  if  she  can't  bear  'em 

I'll  call  in  the  next  undertaker." 

His  locum  tenens,  Doctor  Byam, 

Said:  "Right  oh,  old  fellow,  we'll  try  'em, 

For  I'm  an  adept,  O, 

At  pumping  in  strepto 

Since  I  was  a  surgeon  in  Siam." 

The  patient,  who  hailed  from  New  Zealing, 

Said :  "  Pray  don't  consider  my  feeling, 

Provided  you're  certain 

'Twill  not  go  on  hurtin', 

I'll  lie  here  and  smile  at  the  ceiling." 

=  129  = 


Journal   1919 

These  two  very  bloodthirsty  men 

Injected  five  million,  then  ten, 

But  found  that  the  strepto 

Had  suddenly  crept  to 

Her  feet  —  and  the  worst  happened  then! 

Any  day  you  may  happen  to  meet 

Her  alone  in  the  Hampstead  High  Street 

In  a  box  on  four  wheels 

With  a  whistle  that  squeals; 

And  her  hands  do  the  job  of  her  feet. 

[In  September  1919  K.M.  went  to  San  Remo,  and,  after  a 
few  weeks,  took  a  little  furnished  cottage  —  the  "  Casetta  "  — 
at  Ospedaletti  near  by.  I  was  with  her  in  San  Remo,  but  re- 
turned to  England  to  my  work  as  editor  of  The  Athenceum  as 
soon  as  she  was  settled  into  the  "  Casetta  "  with  L.M.  For  a 
time  K.M.  was  very  happy;  but  then  illness  and  isolation  and 
the  everlasting  sound  of  the  sea  began  to  depress  her.] 

Mrs.  Nightingale:  A  Dream 
November.  Walking  up  a  dark  hill  with  high  iron 
fences  at  the  sides  of  the  road  and  immense  trees  over. 
I  was  looking  for  a  midwife,  Mrs.  Nightingale.  A  little 
girl,  barefoot,  with  a  handkerchief  over  her  head  pat- 
tered up  and  put  her  chill  hand  in  mine;  she  would 
lead  me. 

A  light  showed  from  a  general  shop.  Inside  a  beau- 
tiful fair  angry  young  woman  directed  me  up  the  hill 
and  to  the  right. 

"  You  should  have  believed  me!  "  said  the  child, 
and  dug  her  nails  into  my  palm. 

There  reared  up  a  huge  wall  with  a  blank  notice 

=  130  = 


Mrs.   Nightingale 


plastered  on  it.  That  was  the  house.  In  a  low  room, 
sitting  by  a  table,  a  dirty  yellow  and  black  rug  on  her 
knees,  an  old  hag  sat.  She  had  a  grey  handkerchief  on 
her  head.  Beside  her  on  the  table  was  a  jar  of  onions 
and  a  fork.  I  explained.  She  was  to  come  to  mother. 
Mother  was  very  delicate:  her  eldest  daughter  was 
thirty-one  and  she  had  heart  disease.  "  So  please  come 
at  once." 

"  Has  she  any  adhesions  ?  "  muttered  the  old  hag, 
and  she  speared  an  onion,  ate  it  and  rubbed  her  nose. 

"  Oh,  yes  "  —  I  put  my  hands  on  my  breast  — 
"  many,  many  plural  adhesions." 

"Ah,  that's  bad,  that's  very  bad,"  said  the  old 
crone,  hunching  up  the  rug  so  that  through  the  fringe 
I  saw  her  square  slippers.  "  But  I  can't  come.  I've  a 
case  at  four  o'clock." 

At  that  moment  a  healthy,  bonny  young  woman 
came  in  with  a  bundle.  She  sat  down  by  the  midwife 
and  explained,  "Jinnie  has  had  hers  already."  She 
unwound  the  bundle  too  quickly:  a  new-born  baby 
with  round  eyes  fell  forward  on  her  lap.  I  felt  the 
pleasure  of  the  little  girl  beside  me  —  a  kind  of  quiver. 
The  young  woman  blushed  and  lowered  her  voice.  "  I 
got  her  to  .  .  ."  And  she  paused  to  find  a  very  medical 
-private  word  to  describe  washing.  .  .  .  "To  navigate 
with  a  bottle  of  English  water,"  she  said,  "  but  it  isn't 
all  away  yet." 

Mrs.  Nightingale  told  me  to  go  to  the  friend,  Ma- 
dame Leger,  who  lived  on  the  terrace  with  a  pink  light 
before  her  house.  I  went.  The  terrace  of  houses  was 

=  131  = 


Journal  igig 

white  and  grey-blue  in  the  moonlight  with  dark  pines 
down  the  road.  I  saw  the  exquisite  pink  light.  But  just 
then  there  was  a  clanking  sound  behind  me,  and  there 
was  the  little  girl,  bursting  with  breathlessness  drag- 
ging in  her  arms  a  huge  black  bag.  "  Mrs.  Nightingale 
says  you  forgot  this." 

So  /  was  the  midwife.  I  walked  on  thinking :  "  I'll  go 
and  have  a  look  at  the  poor  little  soul.  But  it  won't 
be  for  a  long  time  yet." 

Et  in  Arcadia  Ego 

To  sit  in  front  of  the  little  wood  fire,  your  hands 
crossed  in  your  lap  and  your  eyes  closed  —  to  fancy 
you  see  again  upon  your  eyelids  all  the  dancing  beauty 
of  the  day,  to  feel  the  flame  on  your  throat  as  you  used 
to  imagine  you  felt  the  spot  of  yellow  when  Bogey  held 
a  buttercup  under  your  chin  .  .  .  when  breathing  is 
such  delight  that  you  are  almost  afraid  to  breathe  — 
as  though  a  butterfly  fanned  its  wings  upon  your 
breast.  Still  to  taste  the  warm  sunlight  that  melted  in 
your  mouth ;  still  to  smell  the  white  waxy  scent  that 
lay  upon  the  jonquil  fields  and  the  wild  spicy  scent  of 
the  rosemary  growing  in  little  tufts  among  the  red 
rocks  close  to  the  brim  of  the  sea.  .  .  . 

The  moon  is  rising  but  the  reluctant  day  lingers 
upon  the  sea  and  sky.  The  sea  is  dabbled  with  a  pink 
the  colour  of  unripe  cherries,  and  in  the  sky  there  is  a 
flying  yellow  light  like  the  wings  of  canaries.  Very 
stubborn  and  solid  are  the  trunks  of  the  palm  trees. 
Springing  from  their  tops  the  stiff  green  bouquets 

=  132  = 


Arcady 

seem  to  cut  into  the  evening  air  and  among  them,  the 
blue  gum  trees,  tall  and  slender  with  sickle-shaped 
leaves  and  drooping  branches  half  blue,  half  violet. 
The  moon  is  just  over  the  mountain  behind  the  vil- 
lage. The  dogs  know  she  is  there ;  already  they  begin 
to  howl  and  bark.  The  fishermen  are  shouting  and 
whistling  to  one  another  as  they  bring  in  their  boats, 
some  young  boys  are  singing  in  half-broken  voices 
down  by  the  shore,  and  there  is  a  noise  of  children  cry- 
ing, little  children  with  burnt  cheeks  and  sand  be- 
tween their  toes  being  carried  to  bed. .  . . 

I  am  tired,  blissfully  tired.  Do  you  suppose  that 
daisies  feel  blissfully  tired  when  they  shut  for  the  night 
and  the  dews  descend  upon  them  ? 

Death 
December  15.  When  I  had  gone  to  bed  I  realised  what 
it  was  that  had  caused  me  to  *  give  way.'  It  was  the 
effort  of  being  up,  with  a  heart  that  won't  work.  Not 
my  lungs  at  all.  My  despair  simply  disappeared  — 
yes,  simply.  The  weather  was  lovely.  Every  morning 
the  sun  came  in  and  drew  more  squares  of  golden  light 
on  the  wall,  I  looked  round  my  bed  on  to  a  sky  like 
silk.  The  day  opened  slowly,  slowly  like  a  flower,  and 
it  held  the  sun  long,  long  before  it  slowly,  slowly 
folded.  Then  my  homesickness  went.  I  not  only  didn't 
want  to  be  in  England,  I  began  to  love  Italy,  and  the 
thought  of  it  —  the  sun  —  even  when  it  was  too  hot 
—  always  the  sun  —  and  a  kind  of  wholeness  which 
was  good  to  bask  in. 

=  133  = 


Journal   1919 


All  these  two  years  I  have  been  obsessed  by  the  fear 
of  death.  This  grew  and  grew  and  grew  gigantic,  and 
this  it  was  that  made  me  cling  so,  I  think.  Ten  days 
ago  it  went,  I  care  no  more.  It  leaves  me  perfectly 
cold.  .  .  .  Life  either  stays  or  goes. 

I  must  put  down  here  a  dream.  The  first  night  I  was 
in  bed  here,  i.e.  after  my  first  day  in  bed,  I  went  to 
sleep.  And  suddenly  I  felt  my  whole  body  breaking  up. 
It  broke  up  with  a  violent  shock  —  an  earthquake  — 
and  it  broke  like  glass.  A  long  terrible  shiver,  you  un- 
derstand —  the  spinal  cord  and  the  bones  and  every 
bit  and  particle  quaking.  It  sounded  in  my  ears  a  low, 
confused  din,  and  there  was  a  sense  of  floating  green- 
ish brilliance,  like  broken  glass.  When  I  woke  I 
thought  that  there  had  been  a  violent  earthquake.  But 
all  was  still.  It  slowly  dawned  upon  me  —  the  con- 
viction that  in  that  dream  I  died.  I  shall  go  on  living 
now  —  it  may  be  for  months,  or  for  weeks  or  days  or 
hours.  Time  is  not.  In  that  dream  I  died.  The  spirit 
that  is  the  enemy  of  death  and  quakes  so  and  is  so 
tenacious  was  shaken  out  of  me.  I  am  (December 
15,  1919)  a  dead  woman,  and  /  don't  care.  It  might 
comfort  others  to  know  that  one  gives  up  car- 
ing; but  they'd  not  believe  any  more  than  I  did 
until  it  happened.  And,  oh,  how  strong  was  its 
hold  upon  me!  How  I  adored  life  and  dreaded 
death! 

I'd  like  to  write  my  books  and  spend  some  happy 
time  with  J.  (not  very  much  faith  withal)  and  see  L. 
in  a  sunny  place  and  pick  violets  —  all  kinds  of  flow- 


=  134  = 


Death  and    Truth 


ers.  I'd  like  to  do  heaps  of  things,  really.  But  I  don't 
mind  if  I  do  not  do  them.  .  .  .  Honesty  (why  ? )  is  the 
only  thing  one  seems  to  prize  beyond  life,  love,  death, 
everything.  It  alone  remaineth.  O  you  who  come  after 
me,  will  you  believe  it?  At  the  end  truth  is  the  only 
thing  worth  having:  it's  more  thrilling  than  love,  more 
joyful  and  more  passionate.  It  simply  cannot  fail.  All 
else  fails.  I,  at  any  rate,  give  the  remainder  of  my  life 
to  it  and  it  alone. 

December  17.  I'd  like  to  write  a  long,  long  story  on 
this  and  call  it  "  Last  Words  to  Life."  One  ought  to 
write  it.  And  another  on  the  subject  of  Hate. 

December.  It  often  happens  to  me  now  that  when  I 
lie  down  to  sleep  at  night,  instead  of  getting  drowsy, 
I  feel  more  wakeful  and,  lying  here  in  bed,  I  begin  to 
live  over  either  scenes  from  real  life  or  imaginary 
scenes.  It's  not  too  much  to  say  they  are  almost  hallu- 
cinations: they  are  marvellously  vivid.  I  lie  on  my 
right  side  and  put  my  left  hand  up  to  my  forehead  as 
though  I  were  praying.  This  seems  to  induce  the  state. 
Then,  for  instance,  it  is  10:30  p.m.  on  a  big  liner  in 
mid  ocean.  People  are  beginning  to  leave  the  Ladies' 
Cabin.  Father  puts  his  head  in  and  asks  if  "  one  of 
you  would  care  for  a  walk  before  you  turn  in.  It's  glo- 
rious up  on  deck."  That  begins  it.  I  am  there.  Details : 
Father  rubbing  his  gloves,  the  cold  air  —  the  night  air, 
the  pattern  of  everything,  the  feel  of  the  brass  stair-rail 
and  the  rubber  stairs.  Then  the  deck  —  the  pause  while 

=  135  = 


Journal   IQIQ 

the  cigar  is  lighted,  the  look  of  all  in  the  moonlight, 
the  steadying  hum  of  the  ship,  the  first  officer  on  deck, 
so  far  aloft  the  bells,  the  steward  going  into  the  smok- 
ing-room with  a  tray,  stepping  over  the  high,  brass- 
bound  step. . . .  All  these  things  are  far  realer,  more  in 
detail,  richer  than  life.  And  I  believe  I  could  go  on 
until . .  .  There's  no  end  to  it. 

I  can  do  this  about  everything.  Only  there  are  no 
personalities.  Neither  am  I  there  personally.  People 
are  only  part  of  the  silence,  not  of  the  pattern  — 
vastly  different  from  that  —  part  of  the  scheme.  I 
could  always  do  this  to  a  certain  extent ;  but  it's  only 
since  I  was  really  ill  that  this  —  shall  we  call  it?  — 
"  consolation  prize  "  has  been  given  to  me.  My  God ! 
it's  a  marvellous  thing. 

I  can  call  up  certain  persons  —  Doctor  S.  for  in- 
stance. And  then  I  remember  how  I  used  to  say  to 
J.  and  R.  "  He  was  looking  very  beautiful  to-day."  I 
did  not  know  what  I  was  saying.  But  when  I  so  sum- 
mon him  and  see  him  '  in  relation,'  he  is  marvellously 
beautiful.  There  again  he  comes  complete,  to  every 
detail,  to  the  shape  of  his  thumbs,  to  looking  over  his 
glasses,  his  lips  as  he  writes,  and  particularly  in  all 
connected  with  putting  the  needle  into  the  syringe. . . . 
I  relive  all  this  at  will. 

"Any  children?  "  he  said,  taking  his  stethoscope  as 
I  struggled  with  my  nightgown. 
"  No,  no  children." 
But  what  would  he  have  said  if  I'd  told  him  that 

=  136  = 


Stiff  ering 


until  a  few  days  ago  I  had  had  a  little  child,  aged  five 
and  three  quarters,  of  indeterminate  sex?  Some  days 
it  was  a  boy.  For  two  years  now  it  had  very  often 
been  a  little  girl.  .  .  . 

December.  Surely  I  do  know  more  than  other  people: 
I  have  suffered  more,  and  endured  more.  I  know  how 
they  long  to  be  happy,  and  how  precious  is  an  atmos- 
phere that  is  loving,  a  climate  that  is  not  frightening. 
Why  do  I  not  try  to  bear  this  in  mind,  and  try  to  culti- 
vate my  garden?  Now  I  descend  to  a  strange  place 
among  strangers.  Can  I  not  make  myself  felt  as  a  real 
personal  force?  (why  should  you?)  Ah,  but  I  should.  I 
have  had  experiences  unknown  to  them.  I  should  by 
now  have  learnt  C.'s  obiter  dictum  —  how  true  it 
might  be.  It  must  be. 

[Towards  the  end  of  December,  worried  by  the  depression  of 
her  letters,  I  went  to  Ospedaletti  for  a  fortnight  to  see  K.M.] 


December  30.  Calm  day.  In  garden  read  early  poems 
in  Oxford  Book.  Discussed  our  future  library.  In  the 
evening  read  Dostoevsky.  In  the  morning  discussed 
the  importance  of  *  eternal  life.'  Played  our  famous 
Stone  Game  (Cape  Sixpence  and  Cornwall).1 

1  The  Stone  Game  was  simple.  You  placed  a  largish  stone  at  the  ex- 
treme edge  of  a  cliff,  sat  down  about  ten  yards  away  and  shied  smaller 
stones  at  it.  The  one  who  first  toppled  it  over  received  sixpence  from  the 
other.  Hence  the  name,  Cape  Sixpence,  which  we  gave  to  the  cliff  near 
Bandol  where  we  first  played  the  game. 

=    137   = 


Journal   1Q19 

December  31.  Long  talk  over  house.  Foster  said  I 
could  walk.  Sea  sounded  like  an  island  sea.  Happy. 
Lovely  fire  in  my  bedroom.  Succes  eclatant  avec 
demon  before  dinner.  Listened  to  Wingley's  fiddle. 
The  wooden  bed. 


i  g20 

January  I.  J.  prepares  to  go.  Drying  figs  on  the  stove, 
and  white  socks  drying  from  the  mantelpiece.  A  dish 
of  oranges  and  rain-wet  leaves  —  a  pack  of  cards  on 
the  table.  It  rains  but  it  is  warm.  The  jonquil  is  in  bud. 
We  linger  at  the  door.  L.M.  sings. 

January  2.  J.  left  for  London.  The  house  very  empty 
and  quiet.  I  was  ill  all  day  —  exhausted.  In  the  after- 
noon fell  asleep  over  my  work  and  missed  the  post. 
My  heart  won't  lie  down.  No  post.  During  the  night 
the  cat  picture  became  terrifying. 

January  3.  A  load  of  wood.  Sent  review.  Cold  day. 
Miss  S.  called  —  deadly  dull.  Her  yawn  and  recovery. 
Storm  of  wind  and  rain.  I  had  nightmare  about  J.  He 
and  I  *  separated/  Miss  S.  talked  about  tulips,  but  she 
makes  all  sound  so  fussy :  the  threads  of  her  soul  all 
ravelled. 

January  4.  Cold,  wet,  windy,  terrible  weather.  Fought 
it  all  day.  Horribly  depressed.  D.  came  to  tea ;  but  it 
was  no  good.  Worked.  Two  wires  from  J.  According  to 
promise.  I  cannot  write.  The  jonquils  are  out,  weak 
and  pale.  Black  clouds  pull  over. 

=  139  - 


Journal   IQ20 

Immediately  the  sun  goes  in  I  am  overcome  — 
again  the  black  fit  takes  me.  I  hate  the  sea.  There  is 
naught  to  do  but  work.  But  how  can  I  work  when  this 
awful  weakness  makes  even  the  pen  like  a  walking* 
stick? 

January  5.  Nuit  blanche.  Decided  at  3  a.m.  that  D. 
was  a  homicidal  maniac.  Certain  of  this.  Started  my 
story,  *  Late  Spring.'  A  cold  bitter  day.  Worked  on 
Tchehov  all  day  and  then  at  my  story  till  1 1  p.m.  Anna 
came.  We  talked  about  her  to  her  face  in  English.  No 
letters.  Post  Office  strike.  Anna's  bow  and  velvet 
blouse. 

January  6.  Black  day.  Dark,  no  sky  to  be  seen ;  a  livid 
sea;  a  noise  of  boiling  in  the  air.  Dreamed  the  cats 
died  of  anti-pneumonia.  Heart  attack  8  a.m.  Awful 
day.  No  relief  for  a  moment.  Couldn't  work.  At  night 
changed  the  position  of  my  bed.  At  five  o'clock  I 
thought  I  was  at  sea  tossing  —  for  ever.  N.B. 

January  7.  On  the  verandah.  I  don't  want  a  God  to 
praise  or  to  entreat,  but  to  share  my  vision  with.  This 
afternoon  looking  at  the  primula  after  the  rain.  I  want 
no  one  to  dance  and  wave  their  arms.  I  only  want  to 
feel  they  see,  too. 

January  8.  Black.  A  day  spent  in  Hell.  Unable  to  do 
anything.  Took  brandy.  Determined  not  to  weep  — 
wept.  Sense  of  isolation  frightful.  I  shall  die  if  I  don't 

=  140  = 


The  Sea 

escape.  Nauseated,  faint,  cold  with  misery.  Oh,  I  must 
survive  it  somehow. 

January  9.  Black.  Another  of  them.  In  the  afternoon 
Foster  came  and  agreed  I  must  leave  here.  Somehow 
or  other  I  wrote  a  column.  Broke  my  watch  glass.  In 
the  evening  L.M.  and  I  were  more  nearly  friendly 
than  we  have  been  for  years.  I  couldn't  rest  or  sleep. 
The  roaring  of  the  sea  was  insufferable. 

January  10.  Spent  the  evening  writing  another  col- 
umn. Help  me,  God !  And  then  L.  M.  came  in  to  say  I 
was  half-an-hour  slow.  Just  did  it  in  time.  Had  talk 
with  L.M.  Our  friendship  is  returning  —  in  the  old 
fashion.  Thought  out  "  The  Exile."  1  Appalling  night 
of  misery. 

January  11.  Worked  from  9.30  till  a  quarter  after 
midnight  only  stopping  to  eat.  Finished  the  story.  Lay 
awake  then  until  5.30  too  excited  to  sleep.  In  the  sea 
drowned  souls  sang  all  night.  I  thought  of  everything 
in  my  life,  and  it  all  came  back  so  vividly.  .  .  .  These 
are  the  worst  days  of  my  whole  life. 

January  12.  Posted  the  story  and  a  telegram.  Very 
tired.  The  sea  howled  and  boomed  and  roared  away. 
When  will  this  cup  pass  from  me?  Oh,  misery!  I  can- 
not sleep.  I  lie  retracing  my  steps  —  going  over  all 
the  old  life  before. . . . 

1  Afterwards  called  The  Man  without  a  Temperament;  see  "  Bliss." 
-   141    = 


Journal   1920 

January  13.  Bad  day.  A  curious  smoky  effect  over  the 
coast.  I  crawled  and  crept  about  the  garden  in  the 
afternoon.  I  feel  terribly  weak  and  all  the  time  on 
the  verge  of  breaking  down.  Tried  to  work ;  could  not 
work.  At  six  o'clock  went  back  to  bed.  Had  a  dreadful 
nightmare. 

January  14.  Foster  came:  says  my  lung  is  remarkably 
better,  but  must  rest  absolutely  for  two  months  and 
not  attempt  to  walk  at  all.  I  have  got  a  "  bigger 
chance."  Bell  rang  at  night.  My  eye  pains  me.  Can- 
not get  a  move  on.  Dreamed  about  B.  She  gave  me 
her  baby  to  mind. 

January  15.  Sat  in  my  room  watching  the  day  change 
to  evening.  The  fire  like  a  golden  stag.  Thinking  of  the 
fast  always ;  dreaming  it  over.  The  cotton  plant  has 
turned  yellow.  To-night  the  sea  is  down.  P.O.  strike. 
No,  no  letters. 

January  16.  Wrote  and  sent  reviews.  Stayed  in  bed, 
worked.  Had  a  bath.  The  day  was  very  lovely.  I  had 
to  work  hard.  In  the  evening  began  my  new  story  "  A 
Strange  Mistake."  l  P.O.  strike  for  letters  and  tele- 
grams. At  night  I  could  not  sleep.  My  life  in  London 
seems  immeasurably  far  and  all  like  a  dream.  L.M. 
talked  of  herself  as  a  child. 

1  Subsequently  called   The  Wrong  House:  see   "  Something  Childish, 
and  other  Stories,"  where  it  is  wrongly  dated  19 19. 

=    142   = 


Leaving   the   Casetta 


January  iy.  Postal  strike:  no  letters,  no  wire.  Tearing 
up  and  sorting  the  old  letters.  The  feeling  that  comes 
—  the  anguish  —  the  words  that  fly  out  into  one's 
breast :  My  darling!  My  wife!  Oh,  what  anguish !  Oh, 
will  it  ever  be  the  same  ?  Lay  awake  at  night  listening 
to  the  voices.  Two  men  seemed  to  sing  —  a  tenor  and 
a  baritone :  then  the  drowned  began. 

January  18.  No  letters :  strike  still  on.  A  fine  day.  But 
what  is  that  to  me?  I  am  an  invalid.  I  spend  my  life 
in  bed.  Read  Shakespeare  in  the  morning.  I  feel  I  can- 
not bear  this  silence  to-day.  I  am  haunted  by 
thoughts. 

January  19.  No  letters  or  papers.  V.  came;  and  Mrs. 
V.  and  Miss  S.  in  white.  "  The  trouble  Fve  had  with 
you,  Mrs.  Murry,  and  the  expense  it's  put  me  to  — 
more  fuss  than  if  you'd  died  there."  The  women 
against  the  flowers  were  so  lovely  —  even  Miss  S.  I 
had  a  dreadful  crying  fit  about  "  noise  and  cleanli- 
ness." It  was  horrible. 

January  20.  Washed  my  hair.  L.M.  out  all  day.  Here 
alone  —  a  perfect  day.  I  wandered  in  the  garden.  .  .  . 
There  was  a  ship,  white  and  solid  on  the  water.  Over- 
coat disappeared.  The  fire  in  my  room  and  the  double 
light.  All  was  exquisitely  beautiful.  "  Good-bye."  It 
now  believes  we  are  going  and  it  is  safe. 

January  21.  A  day  like  a  dream.  V.'s  hair,  stick, 
jacket,  teeth,  tie  —  all  to  be  remembered.  "  To  use  a 

=  143  = 


Journal   IQ20 

volgarism,  I'm  fed  up."  The  journey  —  the  flowers  — 
these  women  here.  Jinnie's  black  satin  neckcloth  and 
pearl  pin.  This  exquisitive  cleanliness  turns  me  into  a 
cat. 

[On  this  day  K.M.  finally  left  the  Casetta  for  a  nursing  home 
in  Mentone.] 

January  22.  Saw  the  doctor:  a  fool.  The  Casetta  left 
to  itself:  the  little  winds  blowing,  the  shutters  shut, 
the  cotton  plant  turning  yellow.  Spent  a  tiring  morn- 
ing. My  heart  hurts  me.  The  meals  downstairs  are  a 
fearful  strain.  But  the  people  naive. 

January  23.  Saw  two  of  the  doctors  —  an  ass,  and  an 
ass.  Spent  the  day  at  my  window.  It  was  very  lovely 
and  fair.  But  I  was  trying  to  work  all  day  and  could 
not  get  down  to  it.  In  the  night  had  appalling  night- 
mare. 

January  24.  Cousin  C.  brought  the  tiny  dog  to  see  me 
—  a  ravishing  animal.  The  same  despairing  desire  to 
work,  and  could  not  work.  I  suppose  I  started  review- 
ing T.  nine  or  ten  times.  Felt  very  tired  as  a  result  of 
this. 

January  25.  The  meals  here  are  a  horror.  I  seem  to  be 
sitting  hours  and  hours  there,  and  the  people  are  ugly. 
Nevertheless,  thank  God  I  am  here,  in  sound  of  the 
train,  in  reach  of  the  post. 

=  144  = 


M entone 


January  26.  Felt  ill  with  fatigue  and  cold  and  my 
lungs  hurt.  It  is  because  I  am  not  working.  All  is  a  bit 
of  a  nightmare  for  that  reason.  My  temper  is  so  bad ! 
I  feel  I  am  horrid  and  can't  stop  it.  It's  a  bad  feeling. 

January  27.  The  woman  who  does  the  massage  is  not 
really  any  good.  My  life  is  queer  here.  I  like  my  big 
airy  room,  but  to  work  is  so  hard.  At  the  back  of  my 
mind  I  am  so  wretched.  But  all  the  while  I  am  think- 
ing over  my  philosophy  —  the  defeat  of  the  personal. 

January  28.  I  shall  not  remember  what  happened  on 
this  day.  It  is  a  blank.  At  the  end  of  my  life  I  may 
want  it,  may  long  to  have  it.  There  was  a  new  moon : 
that  I  remember.  But  who  came  or  what  I  did  —  all  is 
lost.  It's  just  a  day  missed,  a  day  crossing  the  line. 

January  30. 1  tried  all  day  to  work  and  feel  dog-tired. 
Perhaps  it's  the  massage.  Jinnie  came  to  see  me  and 
brought  me  a  present  from  her  little  dog. 

January  31.  Changed  my  room  for  this  other.  I  prefer 
it.  It  is  more  snug  and  there  is  only  one  bed. 

February  1.  My  room  is  horrible.  Very  noisy:  a  con- 
stant clatter  and  a  feeling  as  though  it  were  doorless. 
French  people  don't  care  a  hang  how  much  noise  they 
make.  I  hate  them  for  it.  Stayed  in  bed ;  felt  very  ill, 
but  don't  mind  because  of  the  reason.  The  food  was 

=  145  = 


Journal   IQ20 

really  appalling :  nothing  to  eat.  At  night  old  Casetta 
feelings,  like  madness.  Voices  and  words  and  half- 
visions. 

February  2.  Connie  and  Jinnie  came  and  brought  a 
notice  of  my  book  ["  Bliss  "].  I  brought  in  more  flow- 
ers. Saw  the  lovely  palm.  Love  will  win  if  only  I  can 
stick  to  it.  It  will  win  after  all  and  through  all 

February  3.  Went  for  a  little  walk  in  the  garden  and 
saw  all  the  pale  violets.  The  beauty  of  palm  trees.  I 
fell  in  love  with  a  tree.  Japonica  is  a  lovely  flower,  but 
people  never  grow  enough  of  it. 

February  4.  Horrible  day.  I  lay  all  day  and  half  slept 
in  this  new  way  —  hearing  voices. 

February  5.  Went  for  a  drive.  All  the  way  gay.  The 
house  and  the  girl.  Couldn't  work:  slept  again.  Dread- 
ful pain  in  joints.  Fearfully  noisy  house!  Saw  an 
orange-tree,  an  exquisite  shape  against  the  sky:  when 
the  fruit  is  ripe  the  leaves  are  pale  yellow. 

February  6.  Determined  to  review  two  books  to-day 
and  to  get  on  with  "  Second  Helping."  Saw  the  fool  of 
a  doctor  to-day.  Diddle-dum-dum-dee !  Cod  is  the 
only  word!  Bad-in-age!  Flat-ter-ie!  Gal-ant-ter-ie ! 
Frogs ! ! !  Vous  pouvez  vous  promener.  Liar.  The  palm 
tree.  Did  not  finish  review;  but  no  matter,  it  goes. 

=  146  = 


Anguish 

February  7.  House  in  a  perfect  uproar.  Dreadfully 
nervous.  Dressmaker  came  and  her  little  apprentice 
who  gave  me  the  flowers.  Had  a  bath  —  but  all  was  in 
a  tearing  hurry  and  clatter.  Had  a  strange  dream. 
"  She  is  one  with  the  moonlight."  George  Sand  —  ma 
sceur. 

February  8.  To  Villa  Flora.  In  the  garden  with  the  un- 
happy woman  lying  on  the  hard  bench.  The  Spanish 
brocade  cloth  —  the  piece  of  heliotrope.  Jinnie's  plan 
that  I  shall  go  and  live  there.  Came  back  and  wrote  it 
all  to  J.  in  delight.  I  for  the  first  time  think  I  should 
like  to  join  the  Roman  Catholic  Church.  I  must  have 
something. 

[Shortly  afterwards  K.M.  left  the  nursing  home  to  stay  at  the 
Villa  Flora  with  her  cousin  Miss  Beauchamp  and  her  friend 
Miss  Fullerton,  whose  devoted  care  of  her  was  rewarded  by  a 
rapid  and  remarkable  improvement  in  her  health.] 

Anguish 

The  postman  was  late.  She  rang  and  asked  the 
eternal  '  deja  passe? '  and  heard  the  eternal  'pas  en- 
core, Madame.'  At  last  Armand  appeared  with  a  let- 
ter and  the  papers.  The  letter  she  read.  And  then  it 
happened  again,  again  there  seemed  to  be  a  dreadful 
loud  shaking  and  trembling:  her  heart  leaped.  She 
sank  down  in  the  bed.  She  began  to  weep  and  could  not 
stop. 

The  first  bell  rang.  She  got  up,  she  began  to  dress, 
crying  and  cold.  The  second  bell.  She  sat  down  and 

=  147  = 


Journal   IQ20 

steeled  herself ;  her  throat  ached,  ached.  She  powdered 
herself  thickly  and  went  downstairs.  In  the  lift:  "  Ar- 
mand,  cherchez-moi  une  voiture  pour  deux  heures 
juste."  And  then  one  hour  and  a  quarter  in  the  bril- 
liant glaring  noisy  salle,  sipping  wine  to  stop  crying, 
and  seeing  all  the  animals  crack  up  the  food.  The 
waiters  kept  jerking  her  chair,  offering  food.  It  was  no 
good.  She  left  and  went  upstairs,  but  that  was  fatal. 
Had  she  a  home?  A  little  cat?  Was  she  any  man's 
wife?  Was  it  all  over? 

She  dressed  and  went  downstairs  into  the  horrible 
hall,  because  there,  with  the  monde  drinking  coffee,  she 
dared  not  cry.  A  little  brougham  drove  up  with  an  old 
dragging  man.  She  got  in.  "A  la  poste!  "  Oh,  these 
little  broughams,  what  she  had  gone  through  in  them ! 
the  blue-buttoned  interior,  the  blue  cords  and  ivory 
tassels,  all,  all !  She  leaned  back  and  lifted  her  veil  and 
dried  her  tears.  But  it  was  no  use.  The  post  office  was 
full.  She  had  to  wait  in  a  queue  for  the  telegrams 
among  horrible  men  who  shouted  over  her  shoulder, 
horrible  men.  And  now,  where?  A  dose  of  sal  vola- 
tile at  the  chemist's.  While  he  made  it  up  she 
walked  quickly  up  and  down  the  shop,  twisting 
her  hands.  There  was  a  box  of  Kolynos.  It  spoke 
of  him,  him  in  her  room,  talking  about  the  foam, 
saying  he'd  leave  his  behind.  Four  francs  seventy- 
five. 

She  bought  and  drank  the  mixture,  and  now, 
where?  She  got  into  the  cab  —  the  old  man  hung  at 
the  door  —  she  couldn't  speak.  Suddenly  down  the 

=  148  - 


Bitter  Life 

road  on  the  opposite  side,  looking  very  grave  came 
Frances.  She  crossed  over  and  taking  her  hand  said 
"  Deo  gratias."  And  she  was  silent  a  moment.  Then 
she  said  suddenly,  "  Come  along  and  see  M'Laren 
now.  Let's  fix  it  now  this  moment."  They  waited  in  a 
very  quiet  room,  rich  with  books  and  old  dark  col- 
oured prints,  and  dark  highly  polished  furniture. 
Frances  went  out  for  a  preparatory  talk  and  then 
came  back  for  her  and  they  entered  the  doctor's  room. 
He  was  short,  dry,  with  a  clipped  beard  and  fine  brown 
eyes.  A  fire  burned:  there  were  books  everywhere. 
German  books  too.  Frances  stayed  while  the  long 
familiar  careful  examination  went  on  again.  The  doc- 
tor took  infinite  pains.  When  he  had  done  she  dressed, 
and  Frances  said :  "  Doctor,  it's  the  desire  of  my  life 
to  cure  this  —  little  friend  of  mine.  You  must  let  me 
have  her,  you  must  let  me  do  it."  And  after  a  pause 
which  the  other  thought  final,  he  said :  "  I  think  it 
would  be  ideal  for  her  to  be  with  you.  She  ought  not 
to  have  to  suffer  noise  and  the  constant  sight  of  repel- 
lent people.  She  is  highly  sensitive  and  her  disease  — 
of  such  long  standing,  has  increased  it  a  thousand- 
fold." He  was  quiet,  grave,  gentle.  Oh,  if  they  could 
have  known  or  seen  her  heart  that  had  been  stabbed 
and  stabbed.  But  she  managed  to  smile  and  thank  the 
doctor,  and  then  Frances  put  her  back  into  the 
brougham,  and  it  was  arranged  she  would  leave  in  ,a 
week. 

All  the  afternoon  she  had  been  seeing  wallflowers. 
Let  her  never  have  a  sprig  of  wallflowers  —  if  ever  she 

=  149  = 


Journal   1920 

had  a  garden.  Oh,  anguish  of  life!  Oh,  bitter,  bitter 
Life!  That  reminded  her  of  wallflowers  and  Shake- 
speare. Yes,  how  in  a  Winter's  Tale,  Perdita  refused 
gillyflowers  in  her  garden.  "  They  call  them  nature's 
bastards."  She  came  back  into  her  room  and  lay  down. 
It  was  like  Bavaria  again,  but  worse,  worse  —  and 
now  she  could  not  take  a  drug,  or  anything.  She  must 
just  bear  it  and  go  on. 

The  Glimpse 

And  yet  one  has  these  '  glimpses  ',  before  which  all 
that  one  ever  has  written  (what  has  one  written?)  — 
all  (yes,  all)  that  one  ever  has  read,  pales.  .  .  .The 
waves,  as  I  drove  home  this  afternoon,  and  the  high 
foam,  how  it  was  suspended  in  the  air  before  it  fell. . .  . 
What  is  it  that  happens  in  that  moment  of  suspen- 
sion? It  is  timeless.  In  that  moment  (what  do  I 
mean?)  the  whole  life  of  the  soul  is  contained.  One  is 
flung  up  —  out  of  life  —  one  is  '  held,'  and  then,  — 
down,  bright,  broken,  glittering  on  to  the  rocks,  tossed 
back,  part  of  the  ebb  and  flow. 

I  don't  want  to  be  sentimental.  But  while  one  hangs, 
suspended  in  the  air,  held,  —  while  I  watched  the 
spray,  I  was  conscious  for  life  of  the  white  sky  with  a 
web  of  torn  grey  over  it ;  of  the  slipping,  sliding,  slith- 
ering sea ;  of  the  dark  woods  blotted  against  the  cape; 
of  the  flowers  on  the  tree  I  was  passing;  and  more  — 
of  a  huge  cavern  where  my  selves  (who  were  like  an- 
cient sea-weed  gatherers)  mumbled,  indifferent  and 
intimate  .  .  .  and  this  other  self  apart  in  the  carriage, 

=  150  - 


Dickens 

grasping  the  cold  knob  of  her  umbrella,  thinking  of  a 
ship,  of  ropes  stiffened  with  white  paint  and  the  wet, 
napping  oilskins  of  sailors.  .  .  .  Shall  one  ever  be  at 
peace  with  oneself?  Ever  quiet  and  uninterrupted  — 
without  pain  —  with  the  one  whom  one  loves  under 
the  same  roof?  Is  it  too  much  to  ask? 

February  29.  Oh,  to  be  a  writer,  a  real  writer  given  up 
to  it  and  to  it  alone!  Oh,  I  failed  to-day;  I  turned 
back,  looked  over  my  shoulder,  and  immediately  it 
happened,  I  felt  as  though  I  too  were  struck  down.  The 
day  turned  cold  and  dark  on  the  instant.  It  seemed  to 
belong  to  summer  twilight  in  London,  to  the  clang 
of  the  gates  as  they  close  the  garden,  to  the  deep 
light  painting  the  high  houses,  to  the  smell  of  leaves 
and  dust,  to  the  lamp-light,  to  that  stirring  of  the 
senses,  to  the  languor  of  twilight,  the  breath  of  it 
on  one's  cheek,  to  all  those  things  which  (I  feel 
to-day)  are  gone  from  me  for  ever.  ...  I  feel  to- 
day that  I  shall  die  soon  and  suddenly :  but  not  of  my 
lungs. 

There  are  moments  when  Dickens  is  possessed  by 
this  power  of  writing :  he  is  carried  away.  That  is  bliss. 
It  certainly  is  not  shared  by  writers  to-day.  The  death 
of  Cheedle :  dawn  falling  upon  the  edge  of  night.  One 
realises  exactly  the  mood  of  the  writer  and  how  he 
wrote,  as  it  were,  for  himself,  but  it  was  not  his  will. 
He  was  the  falling  dawn,  and  he  was  the  physician 
going  to  Bar.  And  again  when  .  . . 

=  151  = 


Journal   1920 

Le  temps  des  lilas  et  le  temps  des  roses 
Ne  reviendra  plus  ce  printemps-ci, 
Le  temps  des  lilas  et  le  temps  des  roses 
Est  passe  —  le  temps  des  oeillets  aussi. 

Le  vent  a  change  —  les  cieux  sont  moroses 
Et  nous  n'irons  pas  couper  et  cueillir 
Les  lilas  en  fleurs  et  les  belles  roses; 
Le  printemps  est  triste  et  ne  put  fleurir. 

O  joyeux  et  doux  printemps  de  l'annee 
Qui  vint,  l'an  passe,  nous  ensoleiller; 
Notre  fleur  d'amour  est  si  bien  fanee 
Las!  que  ton  baiser  ne  peut  l'eveiller. 

Et  toi,  que  fais-tu?  pas  de  fleurs  ecloses 
Point  de  gai  soleil  ni  d'ombrages  frais; 
Le  temps  des  lilas  et  le  temps  des  roses 
Avec  notre  amour  est  mort  a  jamais. 

Life's  a  queer  thing.  I  read  this  to-day,  and  in  my 
mind  I  heard  it  sung  in  a  very  pure  voice  to  a  piano, 
and  it  seemed  to  me  to  be  part  of  the  great  pain  of 
youthful  love. 

Wickedness 

I  kissed  her.  Her  cheek  felt  cold,  white,  and  some- 
how moist.  It  was  like  kissing  a  church  candle.  I 
looked  into  her  eyes :  they  were  pale,  flickering  with 
dim,  far-off  lights.  She  smelled  faintly  of  incense.  Her 
skirt  was  rubbed  and  bulged  at  the  knees. 

"  But  how  could  you  say  that  about  the  Blessed 
Virgin !  "  said  she.  "  It  must  have  hurt  Our  Lady  so 
terribly." 

=  152  = 


§5 


Roosters  and  Hens 


And  I  saw  the  B.V.  throwing  away  her  copy  of  Je 
ne  parle  "pas  francais  and  saying :  "  Really,  this  K.M. 
is  all  that  her  friends  say  of  her  to  me." 

Roosters  and  Hens 
By  night  and  at  early  morning  I  love  to  listen  to  my 
darling  roosters  crowing  to  one  another  from  lonely 
yards.  Each  one  has  a  different  note:  I  have  never 
heard  two  roosters  crow  alike.  But  the  hens  who  seem 
from  their  cackle  to  be  laying  eggs  all  day  long  sound 
as  like  one  another  as  ...  as  ...  In  fact  there's  no  pos- 
sible distinguishing  between  them.  L.M.  says  they  are 
not  all  laying  eggs.  Some  of  them  are  frightened,  sur- 
prised, excited,  or  just  —  playful.  But  this  seems  to  me 
to  make  the  affair  even  more  . . .  humiliating. 

April  4.  Easter  eggs  in  the  folded  napkins.  A  Happy 
Easter.  We  drink  to  absent  friends,  but  carelessly,  not 
knowing  whether  to  bow  or  no. 

April  9.  Cold  and  windy.  Out  of  the  window  the  writh- 
ing palms  —  the  dust  —  the  woman  with  a  black  veil. 
I  feel  I  must  live  alone,  alone,  alone  —  with  artists 
only  to  touch  the  door.  Every  artist  cuts  off  his  ear 
and  nails  it  on  the  outside  of  the  door  for  the  others 
to  shout  into. 

April  11. 1  never  can  remember  what  happens.  It  is  so 
without  outline.  "  Yesterday  "  falls  into  the  general 
shade.  But  all  the  time  one  looks  back  and  there  are 

=  153  = 


Journal  1920 

wonders.  There  is  always  Miss  H.  stretching  out  her 
hands  to  the  great  defiant  mosquito  —  crying  with  a 
kind  of  groan  —  "  Oh,  the  darlings!  "  That  remains 
for  ever.  And  then  one  must  never  forget  the  dog 
which  gets  all  the  love  of  children.  "  Going  nice  ta-tas, 
my  ducksie  pet!  " 

April  12.  Went  to  the  fish  museum  at  Monaco.  Must 
remember  the  bubbles  as  the  man  plunged  the  rod 
into  the  tanks.  The  young  girl.  How  naice!  Young 
girls  make  me  feel  forty.  Well,  one  certainly  doesn't 
want  to  look  21.  The  woman  with  her  three  little  chil- 
dren at  Monte.  .  .  . 

[At  the  end  of  April  K.M.  returned  to  England,  to  her  house 
in  Hampstead.] 

August  9.  "  And  if  a  man  will  consider  life  in  its  whole 
circuit,  and  see  how  superabundantly  it  is  furnished 
with  what  is  extra-ordinary  and  beautiful  and  great, 
he  shall  soon  know  for  what  we  were  born." 

August  9.  I  should  like  to  have  a  secret  code  to  put 
on  record  what  I  feel  to-day.  If  I  forget  it,  may  my 
right  hand  forget  its  cunning  . .  .  the  lifted  curtain  .  .  . 
the  hand  at  the  fire  with  the  ring  and  stretched  fingers 
. . .  no,  it's  snowing  . . .  the  telegram  to  say  he's  not . .  . 
just  the  words  arrive  8.31.  But  if  I  say  more  I'll  give 
myself  away. 

[Later.]  I  wrote  this  because  there  is  a  real  danger 
of  forgetting  that  kind  of  intensity,  and  it  won't  do. 

=  154  = 


Coughing 

December  8,  1920.  No,  there  is  no  danger  of  for- 
getting. 

August  12.  More  beautiful  by  far  than  a  morning  in 
spring  or  summer.  The  mist  —  the  trees  standing  in 
it  —  not  a  leaf  moves  —  not  a  breath  stirs.  There  is  a 
faint  smell  of  burning.  The  sun  comes  slowly  — 
slowly  the  room  grows  lighter.  Suddenly,  on  the  car- 
pet, there  is  a  square  of  pale,  red  light.  The  bird  in 
the  garden  goes  '  snip  —  snip  —  snip  '  —  a  little 
wheezy,  like  the  sound  of  a  knife-grinder.  The  nastur- 
tiums blaze  in  the  garden :  their  leaves  are  pale.  On 
the  lawn,  his  paws  tucked  under  him,  sits  the  black 
and  white  cat 

August.  I  cough  and  cough,  and  at  each  breath  a 
dragging,  boiling,  bubbling  sound  is  heard.  I  feel  that 
my  whole  chest  is  boiling.  I  sip  water,  spit,  sip,  spit. 
I  feel  I  must  break  my  heart.  And  I  can't  expand 
my  chest;  it's  as  though  the  chest  had  collapsed. 
.  .  .  Life  is  —  getting  a  new  breath.  Nothing  else 
counts. 

"  Can't  you  help  me  ?  Can't  you  ?  "  But  even  while 
she  asked  him  she  smiled  as  if  it  didn't  matter  so  much 
whether  he  could  or  couldn't. 

My  nature  . . .  my  nerves  . . .  the  question  is  whether 
I  shall  change  or  not.  Per-sonally.  .  .  .  You  see  him  ? 
And  he  has  a  friend,  a  confidant,  an  old  schoolfellow, 
small,  shabby,  with  a  wooden  leg,  whom  he  has  re-dis- 

=  iS5  = 


Journal   IQ20 


covered.  He's  married.  The  friend  enters  the  new 
menage.  Little  by  little  he  gets  to  know  the  wife.  No 
tragedy.  He  feels  like  a  one-legged  sparrow.  Talking 
together  in  the  house  before  she  comes  in.  "  Is  that 
you,  Beaty?  Can  we  have  some  tea?  " 

Let  the  sparrow  —  let  the  sparrow  —  suffer  the 
sparrow  to. . . . 

Charades.  Roger  of  course  commits  suicide,  cuts 
his  throat  with  a  paper  knife  and  gurgles  his  life  away. 

[The  following  notes  evidently  refer  to  the  first  conception 
of  the  unfinished  story  called  Weak  Heart,  which  is  included 
in  "The  Doves'  Nest"  (see  page  183).  The  date  shows  that 
K.M.  had  cherished  the  idea  of  the  story  a  long  while.] 

September.  The  daughter  of  the  watch-smith.  Her 
piano-playing.  Her  weak  heart,  queer  face,  queer 
voice,  awful  clothes.  The  violets  in  their  garden.  Her 
little  mother  and  father.  The  scene  at  the  Baths :  the 
coldness,  the  blueness  of  the  children,  her  size  in  the 
red  twill  bathing-dress,  trimmed  with  white  braid. 
The  steps  down  to  the  water  —  the  rope  across. 

Edie  has  a  brother  Siegfried.  17.  You  never  know 
whether  he  has  begun  to  shave  or  not.  He  and  Edie 
walk  in  arm  in  arm.  .  .  .  Her  Sunday  hat  is  trimmed 
beyond  words. 

Oh,  that  tree  at  the  corner  of  May  Street !  I  forgot 
it  until  this  moment.  It  was  dark  and  hung  over  the 
street  like  a  great  shadow.  The  father  was  fair  and 
youthful  to  look  at.  He  was  a  clock-maker. 

=  156  = 


Avig-non 


[The  following  entries  belong  to  September  1920,  and  were 
made  on  the  journey  to  the  Villa  Isola  Bella  at  Mentone,  where 
K.M.  spent  the  winter  of  that  year.] 

Feminine  Psychology 

"  It  is  said  that  the  turtledove  never  drinks  clear 
water,  but  always  muddies  it  first  with  its  foot  so  that 
it  may  the  better  suit  its  pensive  mind." 

Isola  Bella:  How  shall  I  buy  it? 

Southward  Bound 

Lying  facing  the  window  I  woke  early.  The  blind 
was  half  pulled  down.  A  deep  pink  light  flew  in  the 
sky,  and  the  shapes  of  the  trees,  ancient  barns,  tow- 
ers, walls  were  all  black.  The  pools  and  rivers  were 
quicksilver.  Nearing  Avignon,  the  orchard  in  the  first 
rays  of  sunlight  shone  with  gold  fruit :  apples  flashed 
like  stars. 

L.M.'s  legs  dangled.  She  dropped  down,  slowly  wav- 
ing her  big  grey  legs,  as  though  something  pulled  her, 
dragged  her  —  the  tangle  of  rich  blue  weeds  on  the  red 
carpet. 

"  A-vig  .  . .  Avig  .  .  .  Avig-non."  she  said. 

"  One  of  the  loveliest  names  in  the  world  done  to 
death,"  said  I.  "  A  name  that  spans  the  ancient  town 
like  a  bridge." 

She  was  very  impressed.  But  then  George  Moore 
could  impress  her. 


=  157  = 


Journal   1920 


Woman  and  Woman 
What  I  feel  is:  She  is  never  for  one  fraction  of  a 
second  unconscious.  If  I  sigh,  I  know  that  her  head 
lifts.  I  know  that  those  grave  large  eyes  solemnly  fix 
on  me:  Why  did  she  sigh?  If  I  turn  she  suggests  a 
cushion  or  another  rug.  If  I  turn  again,  then  it  is  my 
back.  Might  she  try  to  rub  it  for  me  ?  There  is  no  es- 
cape. All  night :  a  faint  rustle,  the  smallest  cough,  and 
her  soft  voice  asks:  "  Did  you  speak?  Can  I  do  any- 
thing? "  If  I  do  absolutely  nothing  then  she  discovers 
my  fatigue  under  my  eyes.  There  is  something  pro- 
found and  terrible  in  this  eternal  desire  to  establish 
contact. 

Man  and  Woman 

Mysterious  is  man  and  woman.  She  sat  on  a  flat 
seat  in  the  corridor  and  he  stood  above  her  while  the 
dark  fat  man  beat  them  up  a  couple  of  beds.  She 
looked  sulky,  stubborn  and  bored.  But  it  was  plain  to 
see  she  suited  him. 

"  Bang  on  the  door  when  you're  ready,  old 
girl!" 

And  the  door  slammed.  He  sat  on  the  flap-seat, 
smoothed  his  thin  smooth  hair,  folded  his  bony  hands. 
A  neat  foot  dangled  from  a  trim  ankle.  The  light  shone 
on  his  glasses.  Seeing  him  thus  one  could  not  imagine  a 
man  who  looked  less  like  a  woman's  man.  But  I  ad- 
mired him  immensely.  I  was  proud  of  them  as  "  made 
in  England." 


=  158  = 


England  and  France 


Breakfast  Time 
It  grew  hot.  Everywhere  the  light  quivered  green- 
gold.  The  white  soft  road  unrolled,  with  plane-trees 
casting  a  trembling  shade.  There  were  piles  of  pump- 
kins and  gourds :  outside  the  house  the  tomatoes  were 
spread  in  the  sun.  Blue  flowers  and  red  flowers  and 
tufts  of  deep  purple  flared  in  the  road-side  hedges.  A 
young  boy,  carrying  a  branch,  stumbled  across  a  yel- 
low field,  followed  by  a  brown  high-stepping  little 
goat.  We  bought  figs  for  breakfast,  immense  thin- 
skinned  ones.  They  broke  in  one's  fingers  and.  tasted 
of  wine  and  honey.  Why  is  the  northern  fig  such  a 
chaste  fair-haired  virgin,  such  a  soprano?  The  melting 
contraltos  sing  through  the  ages. 

England  and  France 
The  great  difference:  England  so  rich,  with  the 
green  bowers  of  the  hops  and  gay  women  and  children 
with  their  arms  lifted,  pausing  to  watch  the  train.  A 
flock  of  yellow  hens,  led  by  a  red  rooster,  streamed 
across  the  edge  of  the  field.  But  France :  an  old  man 
in  a  white  blouse  was  cutting  a  field  of  small  clover 
with  an  old-fashioned  half-wooden  scythe.  The  tops 
of  the  flowers  were  burnt;  the  stooks  (are  they 
stooks  ? )  were  like  small  heaps  of  half-burned  tobacco. 

[Marie  of  the  following  notes  was  the  bonne  at  the  Villa  Isola 
Bella.] 


159 


Journal  IQ20 

Marie 
October.  She  is  little  and  grey  with  periwinkle  —  I  feel 
inclined  to  write  peritwinkle  —  blue  eyes  and  swift, 
sweeping  gestures.  Annette  said  she  is  "  une  personne 
tres  superieure  —  la  veuve  d'un  cocher,"  and  "  qu'elle 
a  son  appartement  a  Nice. .  . .  Mais,  que  voulez-vous  ? 
La  vie  est  si  chere.  On  est  force."  But  Marie  does  not 
look  like  any  of  these  imposing,  substantial  things. 
She  is  far  too  gay,  too  laughing,  too  light,  to  have  ever 
been  more  than  a  feather  in  the  coachman's  hat.  As  to 
an  appartement,  I  suspect  it  was  a  chair  at  a  window 
which  overlooked  a  market. 

Throttling,  strangling  by  the  throat,  a  helpless,  ex- 
hausted little  black  silk  bag. 

But  one  says  not  a  word  and  to  the  best  of  one's  be- 
lief gives  no  sign.  I  went  out  into  the  gentle  rain  and 
saw  the  rainbow.  It  deepens ;  it  shone  down  into  the 
sea  and  it  faded :  it  was  gone.  The  small  gentle  rain 
fell  on  the  other  side  of  the  world.  Frail  —  Frail.  I  felt 
Life  was  no  more  than  this. 

Marie  and  the  Cauliflower 
"  Mon  pauvre  mart  rolled  over  and  said :  Tu  as 
peur?  Que  tu  es  betel  Ce  sont  des  rats.  Douze  encore." 
I  thought,  after  she  told  me,  and  these  words  kept 
rippling  and  rippling  through  my  mind,  something 
had  disturbed  the  long  silent  forgotten  surface.  How 
many  of  his  words  were  remembered?  Did  anybody 
ever  quote  the  living  words  he'd  spoken  ?  "  Tu  as  peur? 

=  160  = 


A   C aulif lower 


Que  tu  es  bete!  "  Words  spoken  at  night,  in  the  dark, 
strangely  intimate,  reassuring.  He  turned  over  and 
lifted  himself  in  his  grave  as  Marie  spoke.  Mournful, 
mournful.  ... 

"What  about  a  cauliflower?"  I  said.  "A  cauli- 
flower with  white  sauce." 

"  But  they  are  so  dear,  Madame,"  wailed  Marie. 
"  So  dear.  One  little  cauliflower  for  2  fr.  50.  It's  rob- 
bery, it's  .  .  ." 

Suddenly  through  the  kitchen  window  I  saw  the 
moon.  It  was  so  marvellously  beautiful  that  I  walked 
out  of  the  kitchen  door,  through  the  garden  and  leaned 
over  the  gate  before  I  knew  what  I  was  doing.  The  cold 
bars  of  the  gate  stopped  me.  The  moon  was  full,  trans- 
parent, glittering.  It  hung  over  the  sighing  sea.  I 
looked  at  it  for  a  long  time.  Then  I  turned  round,  and 
the  little  house  faced  me  —  a  little  white  house  quiv- 
ering with  light,  a  house  like  a  candle  shining  behind 
a  feather  of  mimosa-tree.  I  had  utterly  forgotten  these 
things  when  I  was  ordering  the  dinner.  I  went  back  to 
the  kitchen. 

"Let  us  have  a  cauliflower  at  any  price,"  I  said 
firmly. 

And  Marie  muttered,  bending  over  a  pot  —  could 
she  have  understood?  —  "En  ejjet,  the  times  are 
dangerous !  " 

Foundlings 

"  Does  nobody  want  that  piece  of  bread  and  but- 
ter? "  says  L.M.  You  would  really  think  from  her 
tone  that  she  was  saving  the  poor  little  darling  from 

=  161  = 


Journal   1920 


the  river  or  worse,  willing  to  adopt  it  as  her  own  child 
and  bring  it  up  so  that  it  never  should  know  it  was 
once  unwanted.  She  cannot  bear  to  see  solitary  little 
pieces  of  bread  and  butter  or  lonely  little  cakes  —  or 
even  a  lump  of  sugar  that  someone  has  cruelly,  heart- 
lessly left  in  his  saucer.  And  when  you  offer  her  the 
big  cake,  she  says  resignedly:  "  Oh,  well,  my  dear,  I'll 
just  try,"  as  though  she  knew  how  sensitive  and  easily 
hurt  the  poor  old  chap's  feelings  were,  if  he's  passed 
by.  After  all,  it  can't  hurt  her. 

L.M.  is  also  exceedingly  fond  of  bananas.  But  she 
eats  them  so  slowly,  so  terribly  slowly.  Ah,  they  know 
it  —  somehow  they  realise  what  is  in  store  for  them 
when  she  reaches  out  her  hand.  I  have  seen  bananas 
turn  absolutely  livid  with  terror,  or  grow  pale  —  pale 
as  ashes. 

The  Kiss 
...  I  kissed  her.  Her  flesh  felt  cold,  pale,  soft.  I 
thought  of  nuns  who  have  prayed  all  night  in  cold 
churches.  .  .  .  All  her  warmth  and  colour  and  pas- 
sion she  had  offered  up  in  prayer,  in  cold  ancient 
churches.  .  .  .  She  was  chill,  severe,  pale;  the  light 
flickered  in  her  raised  eyes  like  the  light  of  candles; 
her  skirt  was  worn  shiny  over  her  peaked  knees ;  she 
smelled  faintly  of  incense.  "  No,  Father.  Yes,  Father. 
Do  you  think  so,  Father?  "  (But  still  I  haven't  said 
what  I  wanted  to  say.)  October  18,  1920. 


=  162  = 


Resolutions 


The  Doll 

"Well,  look!"  muttered  Miss  Sparrow.1  "I've 
nothing  to  be  ashamed  of.  Look  as  much  as  you  like. 
I  defy  you.  It's  what  I've  wanted  all  my  life,"  she 
cried  brokenly,  "  and  now  I've  got  it.  I  defy  you.  I 
defy  the  world !  "  And  she  drew  herself  up  in  front  of 
the  window,  proudly,  proudly;  her  eyes  flashed,  her 
lips  gleamed.  She  pressed  the  doll  to  her  flat  bosom. 
She  was  the  Unmarried  Mother. 

Of  course,  I  can't  write  that.  I'm  surprised  to  have 
made  such  a  crude  note.  That's  the  raw  idea,  as  they 
say.  What  I  ought  to  do,  though,  is  to  write  it,  some- 
how, immediately,  even  if  it's  not  good  enough  to 
print.  My  chief  fault,  my  overwhelming  fault  is  not 
writing  it  out.  Well,  now  that  I  know  it  (and  the  dis- 
ease is  of  very  long  standing)  why  don't  I  begin,  at 
least,  to  follow  a  definite  treatment?  It  is  my  experi- 
ence that  when  an  *  evil '  is  recognised,  any  delay  in 
attempting  to  eradicate  it  is  fatally  weakening.  And  I, 
who  love  order,  with  my  mania  for  the  ■  clean  sweep,' 
for  every  single  thing  being  ship-shape  —  I  to  know 
there's  such  an  ugly  spot  in  my  mind !  Weeds  flourish 
in  neglect.  I  must  keep  my  garden  open  to  the  light 
and  in  order.  I  must  at  all  costs  plant  these  bulbs  and 
not  leave  them  (oh,  shameful!)  to  rot  on  the  garden 
paths.  To-day  (October  18,  1920)  is  Monday.  I  have 
raised  my  right  hand  and  sworn.  Am  I  ever  happy  ex- 
cept when  overcoming  difficulties  ?  Never.  Am  I  ever 

1  See  entry  of  January  24,  1922. 
=    163    = 


Journal   1920 

free  from  the  sense  of  guilt,  even  ?  Never.  After  I  had 
finished  that  slight  sketch,  The  Young  Girl,  wasn't 
there  a  moment  which  surpasses  all  other  moments? 
Oh,  yes.  Then  —  why  do  you  hesitate?  How  can  you? 
I  take  my  oath.  Not  one  day  shall  pass  without  I  write 
something  —  original. 

December  14.  The  baby  became  covered  with  ink- 
spots  and  served  as  a  little  reminder  for  days  of  the 
things  she  had  forgotten  to  say  and  the  things  she 
might  have  said  so  differently. 

The  Little  Cat 

"  Here  he  used  to  sit  and  sometimes  on  the  path 
below  there  sat  a  small  white  and  yellow  cat  with  a 
tiny  flattened  face.  It  sat  very  still  and  its  little  peaked 
shadow  lay  beside  it.  .  .  . 

"  This  little  cat  never  ran  straight.  It  wound  its  way 
along  the  path,  skirting  the  tufts  of  grass,  crept  now 
by  the  fence,  now  to  the  side  of  a  rubbish-heap,  and  its 
little  paws  seemed  to  touch  the  ground  as  lightly  as 
possible  as  though  it  were  afraid  of  being  followed,  — 
traced." 

I  shan't  say  it  like  that.  It's  only  a  note.  But  Ah, 
my  darling,  how  often  have  I  watched  your  small, 
silent  progress !  I  shall  not  forget  you,  my  little  cat, 
as  you  ran  along  your  beat  on  this  whirling  earth. 

When  Jean-Paul  was  undressed,  his  breast  was  like 
a  small  cage  of  bent  bamboos.  And  she  hated  to  see  it. 

-  164  = 


Why  Suffer? 


"  Cover  yourself!  "  And  he  shot  his  small  arms  into 
his  woolen  shirt. 

Why  Suffer? 

"  I  don't  want  you  to  be  other  than  yourself.  .  .  ." 

"  But  if  I  am  myself  I  won't  do  what  you  ask  me 
to  do. ...  I  feel  its  forcing  me.  It's  not  me;  it's  not  my 
geste." 

They  looked  at  each  other  and  for  some  reason  they 
smiled,  actually  smiled. 

"  I  really  and  truly  don't  know  what  I  want  to  do. 
Life  isn't  so  simple  as  all  that,  you  know.  .  .  ." 

And  the  music  went  on,  gay,  soothing,  reassuring. 
All  will  be  well,  said  the  music.  Life  is  so  easy  ...  so 
easy.  Why  suffer  . . .  ? 

This  is  the  music  when  the  elephants  come  in  to 
drink  out  of  bottles.  Then  the  clown  comes  in  and 
takes  the  bottles  away  and  drinks  himself. 

The  Last  Waiting-Room 

One  must  write  a  story  about  a  doctor's  waiting- 
room.  The  glass  doors  with  the  sun  from  outside  shin- 
ing through ;  the  autumn  trees  pale  and  fine ;  the  cyc- 
lamen, like  wax.  Now  a  cart  shakes  by. 

Think  of  the  strange  places  that  illness  carries  one 
into ;  the  strange  people  among  whom  one  passes  from 
hand  to  hand;  the  succession  of  black-coated  gentle- 
men to  whom  she'd  whispered  99,  44,  1  —  2  —  3.  The 
last  waiting-room.  All  before  had  been  so  cheerful. 

"  Then  you  don't  think  my  case  is  hopeless  ?  " 

"  The  disease  is  of  long  standing,  but  certainly  not 

=  165  = 


Journal   1020 

hopeless."  This  one,  however,  leaned  back  and  said: 
"  You  really  want  to  know  ?  " 

"  Yes,  of  course.  Oh,  you  can  be  quite  frank  with 
me." 

"Then,  I  do!" 

The  carriage  came  and  drove  her  away,  her  head 
buried  in  her  collar. 

But  the  champagne  was  no  good  at  all.  I  had  to 
drink  it  because  it  was  there ;  but  there  was  something 
positively  malicious  in  the  way  the  little  bubbles 
hurled  themselves  to  the  brim,  danced,  broke.  They 
seemed  to  be  jeering  at  me. 

Suffering 

I  should  like  this  to  be  accepted  as  my  confession. 

There  is  no  limit  to  human  suffering.  When  one 
thinks :  "  Now  I  have  touched  the  bottom  of  the  sea 
—  now  I  can  go  no  deeper,"  one  goes  deeper.  And  so  it 
is  for  ever.  I  thought  last  year  in  Italy,  Any  shadow 
more  would  be  death.  But  this  year  has  been  so  much 
more  terrible  that  I  think  with  affection  of  the  Ca- 
setta !  Suffering  is  boundless,  it  is  eternity.  One  pang 
is  eternal  torment.  Physical  suffering  is  —  child's 
play.  To  have  one's  breast  crushed  by  a  great  stone  — 
one  could  laugh ! 

I  do  not  want  to  die  without  leaving  a  record  of  my 
belief  that  suffering  can  be  overcome.  For  I  do  believe 
it.  What  must  one  do?  There  is  no  question  of  what  is 
called  '  passing  beyond  it.'  This  is  false. 

-  166  = 


The   Confession 


One  must  submit.  Do  not  resist.  Take  it.  Be  over- 
whelmed. Accept  it  fully.  Make  it  part  of  life. 

Everything  in  life  that  we  really  accept  undergoes 
a  change.  So  suffering  must  become  Love.  This  is  the 
mystery.  This  is  what  I  must  do.  I  must  pass  from 
personal  love  to  greater  love.  I  must  give  to  the  whole 
of  life  what  I  gave  to  one.  The  present  agony  will  pass 

—  if  it  doesn't  kill.  It  won't  last.  Now  I  am  like  a 
man  who  has  had  his  heart  torn  out  —  but  —  bear  it 

—  bear  it!  As  in  the  physical  world,  so  in  the  spiritual 
world,  pain  does  not  last  for  ever.  It  is  only  so  terribly 
acute  now.  It  is  as  though  a  ghastly  accident  had  hap- 
pened. If  I  can  cease  reliving  all  the  shock  and  horror 
of  it,  cease  going  over  it,  I  will  get  stronger. 

Here,  for  a  strange  reason,  rises  the  figure  of  Doctor 
Sorapure.  He  was  a  good  man.  He  helped  me  not  only 
to  bear  pain,  but  he  suggested  that  perhaps  bodily  ill- 
health  is  necessary,  is  a  repairing  process,  and  he  was 
always  telling  me  to  consider  how  man  plays  but  a 
part  in  the  history  of  the  world.  My  simple  kindly  doc- 
tor was  pure  of  heart  as  Tchehov  was  pure  of  heart. 
But  for  these  ills  one  is  one's  own  doctor.  If  *  suffer- 
ing '  is  not  a  repairing  process,  I  will  make  it  so.  I  will 
learn  the  lesson  it  teaches.  These  are  not  idle  words. 
These  are  not  the  consolations  of  the  sick. 

Life  is  a  mystery.  The  fearful  pain  will  fade.  I  must 
turn  to  work.  I  must  put  my  agony  into  something, 
change  it.  *  Sorrow  shall  be  changed  into  joy.' 

It  is  to  lose  oneself  more  utterly,  to  love  more 
deeply,  to  feel  oneself  part  of  life,  —  not  separate. 

=  167  = 


Journal  IQ20 

Oh  Life!  accept  me  —  make  me  worthy  —  teach 
me. 

I  write  that.  I  look  up.  The  leaves  move  in  the 
garden,  the  sky  is  pale,  and  I  catch  myself  weeping.  It 
is  hard  —  it  is  hard  to  make  a  good  death.  .  . . 

To  live  —  to  live  —  that  is  all.  And  to  leave  life  on 
this  earth  as  Tchehov  left  it  and  Tolstoi. 

After  a  dreadful  operation  I  remember  that  when  I 
thought  of  the  pain  of  being  stretched  out,  I  used  to 
cry.  Every  time  I  felt  it  again,  and  it  was  unbearable. 

That  is  what  one  must  control.  Queer!  The  two 
people  left  are  Tchehov  —  dead  —  and  unheeding,  in- 
different Doctor  Sorapure.  They  are  the  two  good  men 
I  have  known. 

19-12-1920.  Katherine  Mansfield. 

At  the  Bay 
At  last  the  milk  white  harbour  catches  the  glitter 
and  the  gulls  floating  on  the  trembling  water  gleam 
like  the  shadows  within  a  pearl. 

[See  Six  Years  After,  "The  Doves'  Nest,"  p.   115.] 

The  house  dog  comes  out  of  his  kennel  dragging  the 
heavy  chain  and  kalop-kalops  at  the  water  standing 
cold  in  the  iron  pan.  The  house  cat  emerges  from  no- 
where and  bounds  on  to  the  kitchen  window  sill  wait- 
ing for  her  spill  of  warm  morning  milk. 

[See  At  the  Bay,  "  The  Garden  Party,"  p.  10.] 
=  168  = 


Morning   Children 


Morning  Children 

Children!  children! 

Oh  no.  Not  yet.  Oh,  it  can't  be  time.  Go  away.  I 
wont.  Oh,  why  must  I  ? 

Children!  Children! 

They  are  being  called  by  the  cold  servant  girls. 

But  they  simply  can't  get  up.  They  simply  must 
have  one  more  little  sleep — the  best  sleep  of  all  — 
the  warm,  soft,  darling  little  rabbit  of  a  sleep.  .  . .  Just 
let  me  hug  it  one  minute  more  before  it  bounds 
away. 

Soft  little  girls  rolled  up  in  rounds,  just  their  bunch 
of  curls  showing  over  the  sheet  top ;  little  long  pale 
boys  stretching  out  their  slender  feet ;  other  little  boys 
lying  on  their  bellies  pressing  their  heads  into  the  pil- 
lows ;  tiny  little  fellows  with  fresh  cut  hair  sprouting 
from  a  tuft;  little  girls  on  their  backs,  their  fists 
clenched,  the  bedclothes  anyhow,  one  foot  dangling; 
girls  with  pig  tails  or  rings  of  white  paper  snails  in- 
stead of  hair And  now  there  is  the  sound  of  plung- 
ing water  and  all  those  youthful,  warm  bodies,  the 
tender  exposed  boy  children,  and  the  firm  compact 
little  girls,  lie  down  in  the  bath  tubs  and  ruffle  their 
shoulders  scattering  the  bright  drops  as  birds  love  to 
do  with  their  wings.  .  .  . 

Squeech!  Squeech!  Tehee!  Quee!  Little  boys  with 
plastered  hair,  clean  collars  and  brand  new  boots 
squeak  from  the  nursery  to  the  lobby  to  the  cupboard 
under  the  stairs  where  the  school  kits  are  hung.  Furi- 

=  169  = 


Journal   IQ20 


ous  young  voices  cry :  "  Who's  stolen  my  ink  eraser 
that  was  in  the  well  of  my  pencil  box?  " 

They  hiss  through  their  teeth  at  the  stolid  servant 
girls  carrying  the  porridge  pots :  "  You've  been  at  this ! 
Thief!  Spy!!" 

The  Stranger 

"You  merely  find  yourself  in  the  old  position  of 
trying  to  change  me.  And  I  refuse  to  be  changed.  I 
won't  change.  If  I  don't  feel  these  things  —  I  don't 
feel  them  and  there's  an  end  of  it." 

For  a  moment  he  stood  there,  cold,  frigid,  grasping 
the  door-handle,  staring  not  at  her  but  over  her  head. 
He  looked  like  a  stranger  who  had  opened  her  door  by 
accident,  and  felt  it  necessary,  for  some  reason  or 
other  to  explain  the  accident  before  he  closed  it  again 
and  went  out  of  her  life  for  ever. 

Weak  Tea 
..."  I  have  just  partaken  of  that  saddest  of  things 
—  a  cup  of  weak  tea.  Oh,  why  must  it  be  weak!  How 
much  more  than  pathetic  it  is  to  hear  someone  say  as 
she  puts  it  down  before  you :  "  I  am  afraid  it  is  rather 
weak."  One  feels  such  a  brute  to  take  advantage  of  it 
until  it  is  a  little  stronger.  I  grasp  the  cup ;  it  seems  to 
quiver  —  to  breathe  —  "  coward !  "  I  confess,  I  can 
never  hear  a  person  at  a  tea  party  say  (in  that  timid 
whisper  you  know,  as  though  they  were  shamefully 
conscious) :  "  Very  weak  for  me,  please,"  without 
wanting  to  burst  into  tears.  Not  that  I  like  desperately 
strong  tea  —  No,  let  it  be  a  moderate  strength  —  tea 

=  170  = 


The   Change 


that  rings  the  bell.  Very  strong  tea  does  seem  to  give 
you  your  penny  back — in  the  teapot  from  the  taste 
of  it. 

Now  and  again  Fred  talked  in  his  sleep.  But  even 
then  you  could  say  he  was  quiet.  .  .  .  She  would  wake 
up  and  hear  him  say  suddenly :  "  it  wants  a  couple 
of  screws,"  or  "  try  the  other  blade,"  but  never  more 
than  that. 

The  Change 

For  a  long  time  she  said  she  did  not  want  to  change 
anything  in  him,  and  she  meant  it.  Yet  she  hated 
things  in  him  and  wished  they  were  otherwise.  Then 
she  said  she  did  not  want  to  change  anything  in  him 
and  she  meant  it.  And  the  dark  things  that  she  had 
hated  she  now  regarded  with  indifference.  Then  she 
said  she  did  not  want  to  change  anything  in  him.  But 
now  she  loved  him  so  that  even  the  dark  things  she 
loved,  too.  She  wished  them  there ;  she  was  not  indif- 
ferent. Still  they  were  dark  and  strange  but  she  loved 
them.  And  it  was  for  this  they  had  been  waiting.  They 
changed.  They  shed  their  darkness  —  the  curse  was 
lifted  and  they  shone  forth  as  Royal  Princes  once 
more,  as  creatures  of  light. 

The  Rivers  of  China 
She  sat  on  the  end  of  the  box  ottoman  buttoning  her 
boots.  Her  short  fine  springy  hair  stood  out  round  her 
head.  She  wore  a  little  linen  camisole  and  a  pair  of 
short  frilled  knickers. 

=  171  = 


Journal   1920 


"  Curse  these  buttons,"  she  said,  tugging  at  them. 
And  then  suddenly  she  sat  up  and  dug  the  handle  of 
the  button  hook  into  the  box  ottoman. 

"  Oh  dear,"  she  said,  "  I  do  wish  I  hadn't  married. 
I  wish  I'd  been  an  explorer."  And  then  she  said  dream- 
ily, "  The  Rivers  of  China,  for  instance." 

"  But  what  do  you  know  about  the  rivers  of  China, 
darling,"  I  said.  For  Mother  knew  no  geography  what- 
ever; she  knew  less  than  a  child  of  ten. 

"  Nothing,"  she  agreed.  "  But  I  can  jeel  the  kind  of 
hat  I  should  wear."  She  was  silent  a  moment.  Then 
she  said,  "  If  Father  hadn't  died  I  should  have  trav- 
elled and  then  ten  to  one  I  shouldn't  have  married." 
And  she  looked  at  me  dreamily  —  looked  through  me, 
rather. 

Snow-Mountains 
Have  you  noticed  how  very  smug  those  mountains 
look  that  are  covered  with  snow  all  the  year  round. 
They  seem  to  expect  me  to  be  so  full  of  admiring  awe. 
It  never  seems  to  enter  their  silly  tops  to  wonder 
whether  it  isn't  rather  dull  to  be  so  for  ever  and  ever 
above  suspicion. 

Cultivated  Minds 
Such  a  cultivated  mind  doesn't  really  attract  me.  I 
admire  it,  I  appreciate  all  "  les  soins  et  les  peines  " 
that  have  gone  to  produce  it  —  but  it  leaves  me  cold. 
After  all,  the  adventure  is  over.  There  is  now  nothing 
to  do  but  to  trim  and  to  lop  and  to  keep  back  —  all 

=  172  = 


The   Gull 


faintly  depressing  labours.  No,  no,  the  mind  I  love  must 
still  have  wild  places,  a  tangled  orchard  where  dark 
damsons  drop  in  the  heavy  grass,  an  overgrown  little 
wood,  the  chance  of  a  snake  or  two  (real  snakes),  a 
pool  that  nobody's  fathomed  the  depth  of  —  and  paths 
threaded  with  those  little  flowers  planted  by  the  mind. 
It  must  also  have  real  hiding  places,  not  artificial  ones 

—  not  gazebos  and  mazes.  And  I  have  never  yet  met 
the  cultivated  mind  that  has  not  had  its  shrubbery.  I 
loathe  and  detest  shrubberies. 

Let  me  remember  when  I  write  about  that  fiddle 
how  it  runs  up  lightly  and  swings  down  sorrowful; 
how  it  searches  — 

In  the  white  lace,  the  spreading  veil  and  the  pearls 
she  looked  like  a  gull.  But  a  quick  hungry  gull  with  an 
absolutely  insatiable  appetite  for  bread.  "  Come  feed 
me !  Feed  me !  "  said  that  quick  glare.  It  was  as  though 
all  her  vitality,  her  cries,  her  movements,  her  wheel- 
ings depended  upon  the  person  on  the  bridge  who  car- 
ried the  loaf. 

The  Voyage  of  "  The  Bugle  " 

No,  no,  said  Miss  P.,  that  really  isn't  fair.  I  love 

serious  books.  Why,  I  don't  know  when  I've  enjoyed 

a  book  as  much  as  —  as  —  Dear  me !  How  silly !  It's 

on  the  tip  of  my  tongue  —  Darwin's  .  .  .  one  moment 

—  it's  coming  —  Darwin's  Decline  and  Fall.  .  .  .  No, 
no,  that  wasn't  the  one.  That's  not  right  now.  Tchuh ! 
Tchuh !  you  know  how  it  is  —  I  can  see  it  quite 

=  173  = 


Journal   1020 

plainly  and  yet  .  .  .  I've  got  it!  Darwin's  Descent  of 
Man !  .  .  .  Was  that  the  one  —  though?  Do  you  know 
now  I'm  not  certain?  I  feel  it  was,  and  yet  it's  unfa- 
miliar. This  is  most  extraordinary.  And  yet  I  enjoyed 
it  so  much.  There  was  a  ship.  Ah!  that's  brought  it 
back.  Of  course,  of  course!  That  was  the  one.  Dar- 
win's Voyage  of  the  Bugle ! 

"  La  mere  de  Lao-Tse  a  congu  son  ills  rien  qu'en 
regardant  filer  une  etoile." 

December  27.  When  I  stuck  the  small  drawing  to  the 
side  of  the  mirror  frame  I  realised  that  the  seal  —  the 
mark  —  the  cachet  rouge  —  had  been  set  on  the  room. 
It  had  then  become  the  room  of  those  two,  and  not  her 
room  any  more.  It  is  not  that  the  room  was  dead  be- 
fore, but  how  it  has  gained  in  life !  Whence  has  come 
the  tiny  bouquet  of  tangerine  fruits,  the  paste-pot  on 
the  writing-table,  the  fowl's  feather  stuck  in  Ribni's 
hair,1  the  horn  spectacles  on  the  Chinese  embroidery. 
The  *  order '  in  which  I  live  is  not  changed,  but  en- 
riched ;  in  some  strange  way  it  is  enlarged. 

This  is  en  effet  just  the  effect  of  his  mind  upon  mine. 
Mysterious  fitness  of  our  relationship !  And  all  those 
things  which  he  does  impose  on  my  mind  please  me  so 
deeply  that  they  seem  to  be  natural  to  me.  It  is  all  part 
of  this  feeling  that  he  and  I,  different  beyond  the 
dream  of  difference,  are  yet  an  organic  whole.  WTe  are, 

1  "  Ribni  "  was  a  Japanese  doll  belonging  to  K.M.,  so  named  after 
"  Captain  Ribnikov,"  the  Japanese  spy  who  is  the  hero  of  Kuprin's  re- 
markable story  of  that  title. 

-    174   = 


Stars 


as  I  said  yesterday,  the  two  sides  of  the  medal,  sepa- 
rate, distinct  and  yet  making  one.  I  do  not  feel  that 
I  need  another  to  fulfil  my  being,  and  yet  having  him, 
I  possess  something  that  without  him  I  would  lack. 
In  fact  we  are  —  apart  from  everything  else  —  each 
other's  critic  in  that  he  '  sees  '  me,  I  see  myself  re- 
flected as  more  than  I  appear  and  yet  not  more  than 
I  am,  and  so  I  believe  it  is  with  him.  So,  to  be  together 
is  apart  from  all  else  an  act  of  faith  in  ourselves. 

I  went  out  into  the  garden  just  now.  It  is  starry  and 
mild.  The  leaves  of  the  palm  are  like  down-drooping 
feathers ;  the  grass  looks  soft,  unreal,  like  moss.  The 
sea  sounded,  and  a  little  bell  was  ringing,  and  one 
fancied  —  was  it  real,  was  it  imaginary?  —  one  heard 
a  body  of  sound,  one  heard  all  the  preparations  for 
night  within  the  houses.  Some  one  brings  in  food  from 
the  dark,  lamp-stained  yard.  The  evening  meal  is  pre- 
pared. The  charcoal  is  broken,  the  dishes  are  clat- 
tered; there  is  a  soft  movement  on  the  stairs  and  in 
the  passages  and  doorways.  In  dusky  rooms  where  the 
shutters  are  closed  the  women,  grave  and  quiet,  turn 
down  the  beds  and  see  that  there  is  water  in  the  water- 
jugs.  Little  children  are  sleeping.  .  .  . 

Does  it  always  happen  that  while  you  look  at  the 
star  you  feel  the  other  stars  are  dancing,  flickering, 
changing  places,  almost  playing  a  game  on  purpose  to 
bewilder  you  ?  It  is  strange  that  there  are  times  when 
I  feel  the  stars  are  not  at  all  solemn:  they  are  secretly 
gay.  I  felt  this  to-night.  I  sat  on  the  cane  chair  and 
leaned  against  the  wall.  I  thought  of  him  contained  in 


175  = 


Journal   IQ20 


the  little  house  against  which  I  leaned  —  within  reach 
—  within  call.  I  remembered  there  was  a  time  when 
this  thought  was  a  distraction.  Oh,  it  might  have  been 
a  sweet  distraction  —  but  there  it  was !  It  took  away 
from  my  power  to  work.  ...  I,  as  it  were,  made  him 
my  short  story.  But  that  belongs  to  the  Past.  .  .  «, 
One  has  passed  beyond  it. 


1 92 1 

The  Question 
January.  Does  one  ever  know?  One  never  knows.  She 
realised  how  foolish  it  would  be  to  ask  the  question : 
"  What  are  you  thinking  of?  "  And  yet  if  she  did  not 
ask  the  question  she  would  never  be  certain  that  he 
was  not  thinking  of.  .  .  .  Even  if  she  asked,  how  could 
she  be  certain  he  did  not  make  up  the  answer. 

[An  unposted  letter.] 

Your  letters  sounded  insincere  to  me ;  I  did  not  be- 
lieve them.  People  don't  write  such  things ;  they  only 
think  they  do,  or  they  read  them  in  books.  But  real  life 
is  on  quite  another  plane.  If  I  were  not  ill,  I  still  would 
have  withdrawn  from  the  world  because  of  my  hatred 
of  insincerity.  It  makes  me  dreadfully  uncomfortable 
and  unhappy.  I  could  have  answered  your  letter  just  in 
your  vein  and  *  accepted '  it,  you  knowing  how  I  ac- 
cepted it  and  I  knowing  that  you  knew  —  but  it 
wouldn't  have  lasted.  It  would  have  been  another  cul 
de  sac  relationship.  What  good  would  that  have  been 
to  either  of  us  ? 

You  see  —  to  me  —  life  and  work  are  two  things 
indivisible.  It's  only  by  being  true  to  life  that  I  can  be 
true  to  art.  And  to  be  true  to  life  is  to  be  good,  sincere, 
simple,  honest.  I  think  other  people  have  given  you  a 

=  177  = 


Journal  1921 

wrong  idea  of  me,  perhaps.  I  like  to  love  only  my 
friends.  I  have  no  time  for  anything  less  precious. 
Friendship  is  an  adventure ;  but  do  we  agree  about  the 
meaning  of  the  word  '  adventure '  ?  That's  so  impor- 
tant! That's  where  I  feel  we  would  quarrel.  If  you 
came  on  to  our  boat  should  we  have  understood  one 
another  ? 

You  must  not  think  I  am  '  prejudiced  '  or  unfair.  I 
am  not.  I  still  wish  it  were  possible ;  but  I  cannot,  and 
I  won't  pretend.  Let  us  really  and  truly  know  where 
we  are  first.  Let  us  be  open  with  each  other  and  not 
concealing  anything. 

January  14.  "  To  be  happy  with  you  seems  such  an 
impossibility !  It  requires  a  luckier  star  than  mine !  It 
will  never  be.  .  .  .  The  world  is  too  brutal  for  me." 
[Keats  to  Fanny  Brawne,  August  1820.] 

[February  ?~\  Le  travail,  meme  mauvais,  vaut  mieux 
que  la  reverie. 

"  But  I  can't  see  why  you  should  mind,  so  much," 
she  said  for  the  hundredth  time.  "  I  can't  see  what  it 
is  you  object  to.  It  isn't  as  though  people  would  notice 
you  even.  Goodness  me!  I'm  always  meeting  them 
since  . . .  since  .  . ."  She  broke  off.  "  And  it  seems  such 
a  waste,  too.  There  it  is,  standing  in  the  hall,  doing 
nothing.  It  seems  so  ungrateful,  after  it's  been  lent 
to  you,  not  to  give  it  a  trial  at  least.  Why  don't  you 
say  something?  " 

She  was  pinning  on  her  hat  in  front  of  the  mirror  in 

=  178  = 


HNMSI 


M entone,   IQ2I 


Truth   to  Life 


the  sitting  room.  Her  outdoor  jacket  and  gloves  lay- 
across  a  chair.  And  when  he  still  didn't  answer  her  she 
made  a  little  weary  hopeless  face  at  the  mirror  which 
meant :  "  Oh  dear,  we're  in  one  of  our  moods  again !  " 
"  If  it's  me  you're  thinking  of  by  any  chance,"  she 
said  quickly,  snatching  at  the  jacket 

Here  is  Marie  with  the  supper.  And  I  shall  have  to 
endure  her  until  it  is  over.  But  that  is  not  important : 
what  is,  is  that  I  have  not  written  anything  to-day 
worth  a  sou.  I  have  passed  the  day  in  a  kind  of  idle- 
ness. Why?  Does  it  take  so  long  to  begin  again?  Is  it 
my  old  weakness  of  will  ? 

Oh,  I  must  not  yield !  I  must  this  evening,  after  my 
supper,  get  something  done.  It's  not  so  terribly  hard 
after  all.  And  how  shall  I  live  my  good  life  if  I  am  con- 
tent to  pass  even  one  day  in  idleness?  It  won't  do. 
Control  —  of  all  kinds.  How  easy  it  is  to  lack  control 
in  little  things !  And  once  one  does  lack  it  the  small 
bad  habits  —  tiny  perhaps  —  spring  up  like  weeds 
and  choke  one's  will.  That  is  what  I  find. 

My  temper  is  bad ;  my  personal  habits  are  not  above 
reproach ;  I'm  ungracious  —  mentally  untidy.  I  let 
things  pass  that  I  don't  understand  (unpardonable!) 
and  I  excuse  myself,  invent  pretexts  for  not  working. 
Yet  is  my  desire  to  be  idle  greater  than  my  desire  to 
work?  Is  my  love  of  reverie  greater  than  my  love  of 
action.  Treacherous  habit!  Habit  above  all  others 
evil  and  of  long  standing !  I  must  give  it  up  at  once 
or  lose  my  self-respect.  .  .  .  He  that  faileth  in  little 

=  179  = 


Journal   IQ2I 

things  shall  not  succeed  in  great  things.  Even  my 
handwriting.  From  this  moment  it  too  must  change. 
After  supper  I  must  start  my  Journal  and  keep  it  day 
by  day.  But  can  I  be  honest?  If  I  lie,  it's  no  use. 

[I  joined  K.M.  at  Mentone  in  February  1921,  when  The 
AthencBum  ceased  separate  publication.  At  the  beginning  of 
May  K.M.  left  Mentone  for  Switzerland,  while  I  returned  to 
England  to  lecture  at  Oxford,  rejoining  her  at  Sierre  at  the  end 
of  May.  After  a  little  while  we  went  up  to  Montana  to  a  fur- 
nished chalet  ("  Chalet  des  Sapins  ").  For  some  weeks  the  ac- 
tion of  K.M.'s  heart  in  the  high  altitude  gave  her  great  pain.] 

May  5.  Geneve:  Salle  d'attente.  The  snow  lay  like 
silver  light  on  the  tops  of  the  mountains. 

In  the  chill,  greenish  light,  the  wide  motionless 
rivers  looked  as  though  they  were  solid,  and  the  pale 
furrowed  earth,  with  white  fruit-trees  like  coral 
branches,  looked  as  if  it  were  water. 

Later.  The  station  clock. 

[An  unposted  letter.] 

The  Tig  Courier,  Sir,  is  a  weekly  paper  that  pays 
you  £950  a  year  for  an  article,  personal  as  possible, 
the  more  intimate  the  better. 

For  three  days  the  Editor  has  been  waiting  for  your 
copy.  To-night  she  got  a  postcard  written  in  a  train ; 
but  that  was  all.  Will  you  tell  her 

(a)  your  reasons  for  withholding  it  (as  subtle  as 
you  like)  or 

(b)  when  she  may  expect  it. 
Address :  Tig,  Stillin,  Bedfordshire. 

=  180  = 


Switzerland 


[An  unposted  letter.] 
Dear  B.  I  can't  tell  you  how  glad  I  am  to  hear  you 
are  dancing  again  —  *  albeit  delicately,'  as  you  say. 

Lo!  how  sweetly  the  Graces  do  it  foot 

To  the  instrument! 
They  dauncen  deftly  and  singen  sooth 

In  their  merriement. 

That  means  you  are  really  better.  Don't  get  ill 
again.  Isn't  it  awful  —  being  ill !  I  lie  all  day  on  my 
old  balcony  lapping  up  eggs  and  cream  and  butter 
with  no  one  but  a  pet  gold-finch  to  bear  me  tumpanee. 
I  must  say  the  gold-finch  is  a  great  lamb.  He's  jet 
tame,  and  this  morning  after  it  had  rained  he  came  for 
his  Huntley  and  Palmer  crumb  with  a  little  twinkling 
rain-drop  on  his  head.  I  never  saw  anyone  look  more 
silly  and  nice.  Switzerland  is  full  of  birds,  but  they  are 
mostly  stodgy  little  German  trots  flown  out  of  Appen- 
rodt's  catalogue.  .  .  .  But  all  Switzerland  is  on  the  side 
of  the  stodges. . . . 

[An  unposted  letter.] 

I  keep  walking  and  walking  round  this  letter,  tread- 
ing on  my  toes  and  with  my  tail  in  the  air;  I  don't 
know  where  to  settle.  There's  so  much  to  say  and  the 
day  is  so  fine.  Well,  here  goes,  darling. 

The  journey  to  Geneva  took  no  time.  My  watchet 
seemed  to  be  racing  the  train.  We  arrived  some  time 
after  one,  and  I  went  and  sat  on  a  green  velvet  chair 
while  L.M.  saw  to  things.  I  suppose  we  had  a  long 

=  181  = 


Journal  IQ2I 


wait  there;  it  did  not  seem  long.  Ever  since  early 
morning  those  mountains  that  I  remembered  from 
last  time  had  been  there  —  huge,  glittering,  with  snow 
like  silver  light  on  their  tops.  It  was  absolutely  wind- 
less, and  though  the  air  was  cold,  it  was  cold  like 
spring.  In  fact  (perhaps  you  realise  I  am  putting  a 
terrific  curb  on  myself)  it  was  delicious.  Only  to 
breathe  was  enough.  Then  we  got  into  an  omnibus 
train,  and  it  waddled  slowly  round  the  lake,  stopping 
at  every  tiny  station.  Germans  were  in  the  carriage; 
in  fact,  I  was  embedded  in  Germans,  huge  ones  — 
Vater  und  die  Mama  und  Hanse.  Every  time  we  saw 
a  lilac-bush,  they  all  cried  Schon!  This  was  very  old- 
world.  There  was  also  a  notice  in  the  carriage  to  say 
that  the  company  had  thoughtfully  provided  a  cabi- 
net. This  they  read  aloud  —  first,  Vater,  then  die 
Mama  and  then  little  Hanse. 

We  arrived  at  Clarens  just  as  the  station  clock 
(which  was  a  cuckoo  clock:  that  seems  to  me  awfully 
touching,  doesn't  it  to  you?)  struck  seven,  and  a 
motor-car,  like  a  coffee-mill,  flew  round  and  round  the 
fields  to  Baugy.  Oh  dear,  you  realize  I'm  just  telling 
you  facts.  The  embroidery  I'll  have  to  leave  for  now. 
The  hotel  is  simply  admirable  so  far.  Too  clean.  Spick 
is  not  the  word,  nor  is  span.  Even  the  sprays  of  white 
lilac  in  my  room  were  fresh  from  the  laundry.  I  have 
two  rooms  and  a  huge  balcony.  And  so  many  moun- 
tains that  I  haven't  even  begun  to  climb  them  yet. 
They  are  superb.  The  views  from  the  windows,  Betsy, 
over  fields,  little  mushroom-like  chalets,  lake,  trees, 

=  182  = 


Montana 

and  then  mountains,  are  overwhelming.  So  is  the  green 
velvet  and  flesh-pink  satin  suite  in  the  salon,  with  cop- 
per jugs  for  ornaments  and  a  picture  on  the  wall 
called  J ugendidylle .  More  of  this  later. 

I  am  posing  here  as  a  lady  with  a  weak  heart  and 
lungs  of  Spanish  leather.  It  seems  to  '  go  down '  for 
the  present.  Well,  I  had  dinner  in  my  room:  con- 
somme, fish  with  cream  sauce,  roast  turkey,  new  pota- 
toes, braised  laitue,  and  two  little  tiny  babas  smoth- 
ered in  cream.  I  had  to  send  the  turkey  and  trimmings 
away.  Even  then.  .  .  . 

Saint-Galmier  is  superseded  by  Montreux,1  which 
the  label  says  is  saturated  with  carbonic  acid  gas.  But 
my  physiology  book  said  this  was  deadly  poison  and 
we  only  breathed  it  out  —  never  unless  we  were  des- 
perate, took  it  in.  However,  according  to  Doctors 
Ritter,  Spingel,  and  Knechtli,  it's  marvellous  for 
gravel  and  makes  the  water  sparkil  like  champagne. 
These  are  the  Minor  Mysteries.  .  .  . 

June  8.  For  the  first  time  since  the  war  I  talked  Ger- 
man to  a  German.  "  Wollen  Sie  fragen  ob  man  warten 
kann  ? "  And  so  on.  It  was  simply  extraordinary. 
Why? 

July.  Montana.  One  thing  I  am  determined  upon. 
And  that  is  to  leave  no  sign.  There  was  a  time  —  it  is 
not  so  long  ago  —  when  I  should  have  written  all  that 
has  happened  since  I  left  France.  But  now  I  deliber- 

1  Saint-Galmier  and  Montreux  are  both  mineral  waters. 
=    I83    = 


Journal   1921 

ately  choose  to  tell  no  living  soul.  I  keep  silence  as 
Mother  kept  silence.  And  though  there  are  moments 
when  the  old  habit '  tempts  '  me  and  I  may  even  get  so 
far  as  to  write  a  page,  they  are  only  moments,  and 
each  day  they  are  easier  to  conquer. 

Chalet  des  Sapins,  Montana.  Just  as  now  I  say 
scarcely  a  word  about  my  treacherous  heart.  If  it's 
going  to  stop,  rt  is  going  to  stop,  and  there's  an  end  of 
it.  But  I  have  been  in  this  little  house  for  nearly  two 
days  now,  and  it  has  not  once  quietened  down.  What 
dread  to  live  in!  But  what's  the  use  of  saying  aught? 
No,  my  soul,  be  quiet.  .  . . 

July  10.  And  now,  just  as  I  felt  a  little  better  and 
less  worried  about  my  head  and  my  heart,  the  gland 
has  become  inflamed  and  all  the  surrounding  tissue, 
too.  It  looks  as  though  an  abscess  were  forming.  So 
here  is  another  scare.  And  with  it,  I've  one  of  my  queer 
attacks  when  I  feel  nauseated  all  the  time  and  can't 
bear  light  or  noise  or  heat  or  cold.  Shall  I  get  through 
this,  too?  It  is  not  easy  still  to  find  the  courage  to  cope 
with  these  onslaughts. . . . 

July  13.  Went  to  the  Palace,  and  had  the  gland  punc- 
tured. It  is  very  unlikely  that  they  will  save  the  skin. 
I  am  sure,  from  the  feeling,  that  they  won't,  and  that 
this  affair  is  only  beginning.  I  shall  be  back  at  the 
Palace  before  the  week  is  out.  In  the  meantime  I  am 
exhausted  and  can't  write  a  stroke. 

=  184  = 


A   Grey   Day 


Well,  I  must  confess  I  have  had  an  idle  day.  God 
knows  why.  All  was  to  be  written,  but  I  just  didn't 
write  it.  I  thought  I  could,  but  I  felt  tired  after  tea  and 
rested  instead.  Is  it  good  or  bad  in  me  to  behave  so? 
I  have  a  sense  of  guilt,  but  at  the  same  time  I  know 
that  to  rest  is  the  very  best  thing  I  can  do.  And  for 
some  reason  there  is  a  kind  of  booming  in  my  head  — 
which  is  horrid.  But  marks  of  earthly  degradation  still 
pursue  me.  I  am  not  crystal  clear.  Above  all  else  I  do 
still  lack  application.  It's  not  right.  There  is  so  much 
to  do,  and  I  do  so  little.  Life  would  be  almost  perfect 
here  if  only  when  I  was  pretending  to  work  I  always 
was  working.  But  that  is  surely  not  too  hard.  Look  at 
the  stories  that  wait  and  wait  just  at  the  threshold. 
Why  don't  I  let  them  in?  And  their  place  would  be 
taken  by  others  who  are  lurking  beyond  just  out  there 
—  waiting  for  the  chance. 

Next  Day.  Yet  take  this  morning,  for  instance.  I 
don't  want  to  write  anything.  It's  grey ;  it's  heavy  and 
dull.  And  short  stories  seem  unreal  and  not  worth 
doing.  I  don't  want  to  write ;  I  want  to  live.  What  does 
she  mean  by  that?  It's  not  easy  to  say.  But  there  you 
are! 

Queer,  this  habit  of  mine  of  being  garrulous.  And 
I  don't  mean  that  any  eye  but  mine  should  read  this. 
This  is  —  really  private.  And  I  must  say  —  nothing 
affords  me  the  same  relief.  What  happens  as  a  rule  is, 
if  I  go  on  long  enough,  I  break  through.  Yes,  it's 
rather  like  tossing  very  large  flat  stones  into  the 

=  185  = 


Journal   IQ2I 

stream.  The  question  is,  though,  how  long  this  will 
prove  efficacious.  Up  till  now,  I  own,  it  never  has 
failed  me. .  . . 

One's  sense  of  the  importance  of  small  events  is 
very  juste  here.  They  are  not  important  at  all.  .  .  .  !  ? 
Strange !  I  suddenly  found  myself  outside  the  library 
in  Wcerishofen:  spring  —  lilac  —  rain —  books  in 
black  bindings. 

And  yet  I  love  this  quiet  clouded  day.  A  bell  sounds 
from  afar ;  the  birds  sing  one  after  another  as  if  they 
called  across  the  tree-tops.  I  love  this  settled  stillness, 
and  this  feeling  that,  at  any  moment,  down  may  come 
the  rain.  Where  the  sky  is  not  grey,  it  is  silvery  white, 
streaked  with  little  clouds.  The  only  disagreeable  fea- 
ture of  the  day  is  the  flies.  They  are  really  maddening, 
and  there  is  nothing  really  to  be  done  for  them :  I  feel 
that  about  hardly  anything. 

The  Barmaid 

She  had  an  immense  amount  of  fuzzy  hair  piled  up 
on  top  of  her  head,  and  several  very  large  rings,  which 
from  their  bright  flashing  look,  you  felt  certain  were 
engagement-rings. 

Above  all  cooking  smells  I  hate  that  of  mutton 
chops.  It  is  somehow  such  an  ill-bred  smell.  It  re- 
minds me  of  commercial  travellers  and  second-class, 
N.Z. 

I'll  stand  in  front  of  the  house  and  knock,  and  when 
the  door  is  opened,  run  in  past  the  maid  and  call  for 
whoever  is  there. 

=  186  = 


The  Problem 


Should  you  say  wasted?  No,  not  really.  Something 
is  gathered.  This  quiet  time  brings  one  nearer. 

July.  I  finished  Mr.  and  Mrs.  Dove  yesterday.  I  am. 
not  altogether  pleased  with  it.  It's  a  little  bit  made  up. 
It's  not  inevitable.  I  mean  to  imply  that  those  two 
may  not  be  happy  together  —  that  that  is  the  kind  of 
reason  for  which  a  young  girl  marries.  But  have  I 
done  so?  I  don't  think  so.  Besides,  it's  not  strong 
enough.  I  want  to  be  nearer  —  far,  far  nearer  than 
that.  I  want  to  use  all  my  force  even  when  I  am  taking 
a  fine  line.  And  I  have  a  sneaking  notion  that  I  have, 
at  the  end,  used  the  Doves  unwarrantably.  Tu  sais  ce 
que  je  veux  dire.  I  used  them  to  round  off  something 
—  didn't  I?  Is  that  quite  my  game?  No,  it's  not.  It's 
not  quite  the  kind  of  truth  I'm  after.  Now  for  Susan- 
nah. All  must  be  deeply  felt. 

But  what  is  one  to  do,  with  this  wretched  cat  and 
mouse  act?  There's  my  difficulty!  I  must  try  to  write 
this  afternoon  instead.  There  is  no  reason  why  I 
shouldn't !  No  reason,  except  the  after-effects  of  pain 
on  a  weakened  organism. 

July  23.  Finished  An  Ideal  Family  yesterday.  It  seems 
to  me  better  than  The  Doves,  but  still  it's  not  good 
enough.  I  worked  at  it  hard  enough,  God  knows,  and 
yet  I  didn't  get  the  deepest  truth  out  of  the  idea,  even 
once.  What  is  this  feeling  ?  I  feel  again  that  this  kind 
of  knowledge  is  too  easy  for  me ;  it's  even  a  kind  of 

=  187  = 


Journal   IQ2I 

trickery.  I  know  so  much  more.  This  looks  and  smells 
like  a  story,  but  I  wouldn't  buy  it.  I  don't  want  to 
possess  it  —  to  live  with  it.  NO.  Once  I  have  written 
two  more,  I  shall  tackle  something  different  —  a  long 
story:  At  the  Bay,  with  more  difficult  relationships. 
That's  the  whole  problem. 

"  Out  of  the  pocket  of  the  mackintosh  she  took  an 
ample  bag,  which  she  opened  and  peered  into  and 
shook.  Her  eyebrows  were  raised,  her  lips  pressed  to- 
gether. .  .  ." 

"  And  a  very  long  shining  blue-black  hairpin  gleam- 
ing on  the  faded  carpet.  .  . ." 

"  She  shuddered.  And  now  when  she  looked  at  his 
photograph,  even  the  white  flower  in  his  buttonhole 
looked  as  though  it  were  made  of  a  curl  of  mutton- 
fat.  . . ." 

"  And  she  saw  Mr.  Bailey  in  a  blue  apron  standing 
at  the  back  of  one  of  those  horrible  shops.  He  had  one 
hand  on  his  hip,  the  other  grasped  the  handle  of  a 
long  knife  that  was  stuck  into  a  huge  chopping  block. 
At  the  back  of  him  there  hung  a  fringe  of  small  rab- 
bits, their  feet  tied  together,  a  dark  clot  of  blood 
trembling  from  their  noses.  .  .  ." 

July  1 8.  The  noise  in  this  house  this  morning  is  sheer 
hell.  It  has  gone  on  steadily  since  shortly  after  six 
o'clock,  and  for  some  reason  the  maid  seems  to  have 
completely  lost  her  head.  It's  now  nearly  ten,  and  she 
hasn't  cleared  the  breakfast  away.  I  have  to  go  again 

=  188  = 


Blankets 

to  the  Palace  at  n,  and  the  consequence  is  I'm  rather 
nervous  anyway.  And  I've  had  the  flowers  to  do  and 
various  things  to  see  to  like  —  laundry.  I  can  hardly 
bear  it.  Now  she  plods  up.  Bang!  She  will  be  at  the 
door  in  a  moment.  I  don't  know  how  to  stand  it  if  it 
goes  on.  She's  here.  She's  about  to  put  the  things  in 
the  lift.  What  are  her  thoughts  ?  I  don't  know  or  care. 
But  I  bitterly  long  for  a  little  private  room  where  I 
can  work  undisturbed.  The  balcony  is  not  good 
enough;  neither  is  this  salon.  Here  again,  J.  has 
beaten  me.  And  it's  not  half  so  important  for  him.  . . . 

A  Welcome 
And  because,  when  you  arrive  unexpected,  there  is 
so  often  a  cold  gleam  in  the  hussif's  eye  which  means : 
"  I  can  manage  the  sheets  perfectly,  but  the  blankets 
are  certainly  going  to  be  a  problem,"  I  would  have 
you  met  in  the  doorway  by  a  young  creature  carrying 
a  not  too  bright  lamp,  it  being,  of  course,  late  evening, 
and  chanting,  as  you  brush  under  the  jasmine  porch: 

Be  not  afraid,  the  house  is  full  of  blankets, 
Red  ones  and  white  ones,  lovely  beyond  dreaming, 
Key-pattern,  tasselled,  camel-hair  and  woolly, 
Softer  than  sleep  or  the  bosom  of  a  swan. 

[In  the  middle  of  the  manuscript  of  Her  First  Ball.] 

July  25.  All  this !  All  that  I  write  —  all  that  I  am  —  is 
on  the  border  of  the  sea.  It's  a  kind  of  playing.  I  want 
to  put  all  my  force  behind  it,  but  somehow,  I  cannot! 

=  189  = 


Journal   IQ2I 

Ful  gay  was  al  the  ground,  and  queynt, 
And  poudred  as  men  had  it  peynt 
With  many  a  fresh  and  sondry  flour 
That  casten  up  ful  good  savour. 

[From  an  unposted  letter.] 
It's  a  chill,  strange  day.  I  can  just  get  about.  I  de- 
cided this  morning  to  write  to  S about  the  Swiss 

Spahlinger  treatment:  whether  it  would  be  suitable 
for  me,  etc.  And  I  shall  wire  you  to-morrow,  asking 

you  to  go  and  see  S .  Say  what  you  like.  But  let 

him  know  that  I  am  practically  a  hopeless  invalid.  I 
have  tried  to  explain  about  money  to  him;  why  I 
haven't  paid  him,  and  I  have  promised  to  pay  the  first 
moment  I  can.  .  .  . 

August.  "  I  have  been  writing  a  story  about  an  old 
man." 

She  looked  vague.  "  But  I  don't  think  I  like  old  men 
—  do  you?  "  said  she.  "  They  exude  so." 

This  horrified  me.  It  seemed  so  infernally  petty,  and 
more  than  that ...  it  was  the  saying  of  a  vulgar  little 
mind. 

Later:  I  think  it  was  shyness. 

August  ii.  I  don't  know  how  I  may  write  this  next 
story.  It's  so  difficult.  But  I  suppose  I  shall.  The 
trouble  is  I  am  so  infernally  cold. 

[The  "  next  story  "  was  The  Voyage.  The  finished  manu- 
script is  dated  August  14,  1921.] 

=  190  = 


Love 

[From  an  unposted  letter.] 
I  would  have  written  a  card  before,  but  I  have  been 
—  am  —  ill,  and  to-day's  the  first  day  I've  taken  a 
pen  even  so  far.  I've  had  an  attack  of  what  the  doctor 
calls  acute  enteritis.  I  think  it  was  poisoning.  Very 
high  fever  and  sickness  and  dysentery  and  so  on.  Hor- 
rible. I  decided  yesterday  to  go  to  the  Palace,  but 
to-day  makes  me  feel  I'll  try  and  see  it  out  here.  J.  is 
awfully  kind  in  the  menial  offices  of  nurse,  and  I've 
not  been  able  to  take  any  food  except  warm  milk,  so 
Ernestine  can't  work  her  worst  on  me.  She  seems,  poor 
creature,  to  be  much  more  stupid  than  ever!  Burns 
everything!  Leaves  us  without  eggs,  and  went  off  for 
her  afternoon  yesterday  without  a  word.  We  didn't 
even  know  she  was  gone. 

Love 
August.  A  sudden  idea  of  the  relationship  between 
'  lovers.' 

We  are  neither  male  nor  female.  We  are  a  com- 
pound of  both.  I  choose  the  male  who  will  develop  and 
expand  the  male  in  me ;  he  chooses  me  to  expand  the 
female  in  him.  Being  made  *  whole.'  Yes,  but  that's 
a  process.  By  love  serve  ye  one  another.  .  .  .  And  why 
I  choose  one  man  for  this  rather  than  many  is  for 
safety.  We  bind  ourselves  within  a  ring  and  that  ring 
is  as  it  were  a  wall  against  the  outside  world.  It  is  our 
refuge,  our  shelter.  Here  the  tricks  of  life  will  not  be 
played.  Here  is  safety  for  us  to  grow. 

Why,  I  talk  like  a  child! 

=  191  = 


Journal   1921 


August  29.  "  If  I  could  only  sweep  all  my  garden  up 
the  hill,  to  your  doors !  "  Her  perfect  little  gesture  as 
she  said  this. 

The  Candlestick 
[An  imaginary  letter.] 
Many  thanks  for  your  stuffy  letter.  As  for  the  can- 
dlestick, dear,  if  you  remember,  I  gave  it  you  on  your 
last  birthday.  No  wonder  it  reminded  you  of  me.  I 
have  kept  it  in  its  paper  and  intend  to  return  it  to  you 
with  a  pretty  little  note  on  your  next.  Or  shall  I  first 
send  it  to  you  as  an  early  Christmas  present  and  do 
you  return  it  as  a  late  one  or  a  New  Year's  gift.  Easter 
we  shall  leave  out.  It  would  be  a  trifle  excessive  at 
Easter.  I  wonder  which  of  us  will  be  in  possession  of 
it  at  the  last.  If  it  is  on  my  side,  I  shall  leave  it  you 
in  my  will,  all  proper,  and  I  think  it  would  be  nice  of 
you,  Camilla,  to  desire  that  it  should  be  buried  with 
you.  Besides,  one's  mind  faints  at  the  idea  of  a  candle- 
stick whirling  through  space  and  time  for  ever  —  a 
fliegende  candlestick,  in  fact ! 

I  have  been  suffering  from  wind  round  the  heart. 
Such  a  tiresome  complaint,  but  not  dangerous.  Really, 
for  anything  to  be  so  painful  I  think  I  would  prefer  a 
spice  of  danger  added.  The  first  act  was  brought  on  by 
a  fit  of  laughing. 

September.  September  is  different  from  all  other 
months.  It  is  more  magical.  I  feel  the  strange  chemical 
change  in  the  earth  which  produces  mushrooms  is  the 

=  192  = 


September 


cause,  too,  of  this  extra  '  life  '  in  the  air  —  a  resilience, 
a  sparkle.  For  days  the  weather  has  been  the  same. 
One  wakes  to  see  the  trees  outside  bathed  in  green- 
gold  light.  It's  fresh  —  not  cold.  It's  clear.  The  sky  is  a 
light  pure  blue.  During  the  morning  the  sun  gets  hot. 
There  is  a  haze  over  the  mountains.  Occasionally  a 
squirrel  appears,  runs  up  the  mast  of  a  pine-tree, 
seizes  a  cone  and  sits  in  the  crook  of  a  branch,  holding 
it  like  a  banana.  Now  and  again  a  little  bird,  hanging 
upside-down,  pecks  at  the  seed.  There  is  a  constant 
sound  of  bells  from  the  valley.  It  keeps  on  all  day, 
from  early  to  late. 

Midday  —  with  long  shadows.  Hot  and  still.  And 
yet  there's  always  that  taste  of  a  berry  rather  than 
scent  of  a  flower  in  the  air.  But  what  can  one  say  of  the 
afternoons?  Of  the  evening?  The  rose,  the  gold  on  the 
mountains,  the  quick  mounting  shadows?  But  it's 
soon  cold  —  Beautifully  cold,  however. 

September 

[The  following  occurs  in  the  middle  of  an  unpublished  and 
unfinished  MS.  called  "  By  Moonlight."  "  Karori  "  was  the 
"  novel  "  of  which  Prelude  and  At  the  Bay  were  —  at  one  time 
—  to  have  formed  parts.  But  eventually  the  idea  was  aban- 
doned, because  K.M.  saw  that  her  "  novel "  would  have  been 
so  unlike  a  novel  that  it  was  no  use  calling  it  one.] 

I  am  struck  beyond  words,  and  again  it  seems  to  me 
that  what  I  am  doing  has  no  form!  I  ought  to  finish 
my  book  of  stories  first  and  then,  when  it's  gone,  really 
get  down  to  my  novel,  Karori. 

=  193  - 


Journal  1921 

Why  I  should  be  so  passionately  determined  to  dis- 
guise this,  I  don't  quite  know.  But  here  I  lie,  pretend- 
ing, as  Heaven  knows  how  often  I  have  before,  to 
write.  Supposing  I  were  to  give  up  this  pretence  and 
really  did  try?  Supposing  I  only  wrote  half  a  page  in 
a  day  —  it  would  be  half  a  page  to  the  good;  and  I 
should  at  least  be  training  my  mind  to  get  into  the 
habit  of  regular  performance.  As  it  is,  every  day  sees 
me  further  off  my  goal.  And,  once  I  had  this  book  fin- 
ished, I'm  free  to  start  the  real  one.  And  it's  a  question 
of  money. 

But  my  idea,  even  of  the  short  story,  has  changed 
rather,  lately  —  That  was  lucky!  J.  opened  the  door 
softly  and  I  was  apparently  really  truly  engaged.  .  .  . 
And  —  no,  enough  of  this.  It  has  served  its  purpose. 
It  has  put  me  on  the  right  lines. 

[At  the  end  of  the  same  MS.  is  this  note.] 
This  isn't  bad,  but  at  the  same  time  it's  not  good. 
It's  too  easy.  ...  I  wish  I  could  go  back  to  N.Z.  for 
a  year.  But  I  can't  possibly  just  now.  I  don't  see  why 
not,  in  two  years'  time  though. 

[An  unposted  letter.] 
October  13.  Dear  Friend.  I  like  your  criticism.  It  is 
right  you  should  have  hated  those  things  in  me.  For  I 
was  careless  and  false.  I  was  not  true  in  those  days. 
But  I  have  been  trying  for  a  long  time  now  to 
"  squeeze  the  slave  out  of  my  soul."  ...  I  just  want  to 
let  you  know. 

=  194  = 


"The   Garden  Party" 


Oh,  I  am  in  the  middle  of  a  nice  story  [  The  Garden 
Party] .  I  wish  you  would  like  it.  I  am  writing  it  in  this 
exercise  book,  and  just  broke  off  for  a  minute  to  write 
to  you. 

Thank  you  for  the  address.  I  can't  go  to  Paris  be- 
fore the  spring,  so  I  think  it  would  be  better  if  I  did 
not  write  until  then.  I  feel  this  light  treatment  is  the 
right  one.  Not  that  I  am  ill  at  present.  I  am  not  in  the 
least  an  invalid,  in  any  way. 

It's  a  sunny,  windy  day  —  beautiful.  There  is  a  soft 
roaring  in  the  trees  and  little  birds  fly  up  into  the  air 
just  for  the  fun  of  being  tossed  about. 

Good-bye.  I  press  your  hand.  Do  you  dislike  the 
idea  we  should  write  to  each  other  from  time  to 
time  ?  Katherine. 

[At  the  end  of  the  manuscript  of  The  Garden  Party.] 

This  is  a  moderately  successful  story,  and  that's  all. 
It's  somehow,  in  the  episode  at  the  lane,  scamped. 

The  New  Baby 

It  is  late  night,  very  dark,  very  still.  Not  a  star  to 
be  seen.  And  now  it  has  come  on  to  rain.  What  happi- 
ness it  is  to  listen  to  rain  at  night;  joyful  relief,  ease; 
a  lapping-round  and  hushing  and  brooding  tender- 
ness, all  are  mingled  together  in  the  sound  of  the  fast- 
falling  rain.  God,  looking  down  upon  the  rainy  earth, 
sees  how  faint  are  these  lights  shining  in  little  win- 
dows, —  how  easily  put  out. . . . 

Suddenly,    quick    hard    steps    mount    the    stone 

=  195  = 


Journal   1921 


staircase.  Someone  is  hurrying.  There  is  a  knock  at  my 
door,  and  at  the  same  moment  a  red  beaming  face  is 
thrust  in,  as  Ernestine  announces,  "  He  is  born." 

Born! 

"He  is  born!" 

Oh,  Ernestine,  don't  turn  away.  Don't  be  afraid. 
Let  me  weep  too. 

You  ought  to  keep  this,  my  girl,  just  as  a  warning 
to  show  what  an  arch-wallower  you  can  be. 

October  16.  Another  radiant  day.  J.  is  typing  my  last 
story,  The  Garden  Party,  which  I  finished  on  my 
birthday  [October  14].  It  took  me  nearly  a  month  to 
1  recover  '  from  At  the  Bay.  I  made  at  least  three  false 
starts.  But  I  could  not  get  away  from  the  sound  of 
the  sea,  and  Beryl  fanning  her  hair  at  the  window. 
These  things  would  not  die  down.  But  now  I'm 
not  at  all  sure  about  that  story.  It  seems  to  me 
it's  a  little  '  wispy '  —  not  what  it  might  have  been. 
The  G.P.  is  better.  But  that  is  not  good  enough, 
either.  .  .  . 

The  last  few  days  what  one  notices  more  than  any- 
thing is  the  blue.  Blue  sky,  blue  mountains,  all  is  a 
heavenly  blueness !  And  clouds  of  all  kinds  —  wings, 
soft  white  clouds,  almost  hard  little  golden  islands, 
great  mock-mountains.  The  gold  deepens  on  the 
slopes.  In  fact,  in  sober  fact,  it  is  perfection. 

But  the  late  evening  is  the  time  —  of  times.  Then 
with  that  unearthly  beauty  before  one  it  is  not  hard  to 

=  196  = 


Montana,  IQ2I 


Simplicity 

realise  how  far  one  has  to  go.  To  write  something  that 
will  be  worthy  of  that  rising  moon,  that  pale  light.  To 
be  *  simple '  enough,  as  one  would  be  simple  before 
God.  ... 

October  27.  Stories  for  my  new  book. 

N.Z.  Honesty:  The  Doctor,  Arnold  Cullen,  and  his 
wife  Lydia,  and  Archie  the  friend. 

L.  Second  Violin:  Alexander  and  his  friend  in  the 
train.  Spring  —  spouting  rain.  Wet  lilac. 

N.Z.  Six  Years  After:  A  wife  and  husband  on  board 
a  steamer.  The  cold  buttons.  They  see  someone  who 
reminds  them. 

L.  Life  like  Logs  of  Driftwood:  This  wants  to  be  a 
long,  very  well-written  story.  The  men  are  important, 
especially  the  lesser  man.  It  wants  a  good  deal  of 
working  .  .  .  newspaper  office. 

N.Z.  A  Weak  Heart :  Ronnie  on  his  bike  in  the  eve- 
ning, with  his  hands  in  his  pockets,  doing  marvels,  by 
that  dark  tree  at  the  corner  of  May  Street.  Edie  and 
Ronnie. 

L.  Widowed:  Geraldine  and  Jimmie :  a  house  over- 
looking Sloane  Street  and  Square.  Wearing  those  buds 
at  her  heart.  "  Married  or  not  married.  .  .  ."  From 
Autumn  to  Spring. 

N.Z.  Our  Maude:  Husband  and  wife  play  duets 


—         KJ  — 


and  a  one  a  two  a  three  a  one  a  two  three  one!  His 
white  waistcoats.  Wifeling  and  Mahub!  What  a  girl 
you  are ! 

=  197  - 


Journal  IQ2I 

N.Z.  At  Karori:  The  little  lamp.  I  seen  it.  And  then 
they  were  silent.  (Finito:  October  30,  1921.) 

I  wish  that  my  silence  were  only  a  two-minute 
one! 

October.  I  wonder  why  it  should  be  so  very  difficult 
to  be  humble.  I  do  not  think  I  am  a  good  writer;  I 
realize  my  faults  better  than  anyone  else  could  realize 
them.  I  know  exactly  where  I  fail.  And  yet,  when  I 
have  finished  a  story  and  before  I  have  begun  another, 
I  catch  myself  preening  my  feathers.  It  is  dishearten- 
ing. There  seems  to  be  some  bad  old  pride  in  my  heart ; 
a  root  of  it  that  puts  out  a  thick  shoot  on  the  slightest 
provocation. .  . .  This  interferes  very  much  with  work. 
One  can't  be  calm,  clear,  good  as  one  must  be,  while 
it  goes  on.  I  look  at  the  mountains,  I  try  to  pray  and 
I  think  of  something  clever.  It's  a  kind  of  excitement 
within,  which  shouldn't  be  there.  Calm  yourself.  Clear 
yourself.  And  anything  that  I  write  in  this  mood  will 
be  no  good ;  it  will  be  full  of  sediment.  If  I  were  well, 
I  would  go  off  by  myself  somewhere  and  sit  under  a 
tree.  One  must  learn,  one  must  practise,  to  forget  one- 
self. I  can't  tell  the  truth  about  Aunt  Anne  unless  I 
am  free  to  look  into  her  life  without  self-consciousness. 
Oh  God !  I  am  divided  still.  I  am  bad.  I  fail  in  my  per- 
sonal life.  I  lapse  into  impatience,  temper,  vanity,  and 
so  I  fail  as  thy  priest.  Perhaps  poetry  will  help. 

I  have  just  thoroughly  cleaned  and  attended  to  my 
fountain  pen.  If  after  this  it  leaks,  then  it  is  no  gentle- 
man! 

=  198  = 


Wasting    Time 


November  13.  It  is  time  I  started  a  new  journal. 
Come,  my  unseen,  my  unknown,  let  us  talk  together. 
Yes,  for  the  last  two  weeks  I  have  written  scarcely 
anything.  I  have  been  idle ;  I  have  failed.  Why  ?  Many 
reasons.  There  has  been  a  kind  of  confusion  in  my 
consciousness.  It  has  seemed  as  though  there  was  no 
time  to  write.  The  mornings,  if  they  are  sunny,  are 
taken  up  with  sun-treatment ;  the  post  eats  away  the 
afternoon.  And  at  night  I  am  tired. 

'  But  it  all  goes  deeper.'  Yes,  you  are  right.  I  haven't 
been  able  to  yield  to  the  kind  of  contemplation  that  is 
necessary.  I  have  not  felt  pure  in  heart,  not  humble, 
not  good.  There's  been  a  stirring-up  of  sediment.  I 
look  at  the  mountains  and  I  see  nothing  but  moun- 
tains. Be  frank !  I  read  rubbish.  I  give  way  about  writ- 
ing letters.  I  mean  I  refuse  to  meet  my  obligations, 
and  this  of  course  weakens  me  in  every  way.  Then  I 
have  broken  my  promise  to  review  the  books  for  The 
Nation.  Another  bad  spot.  Out  of  hand?  Yes,  that 
describes  it  —  dissipated,  vague,  not  positive,  and 
above  all,  above  everything,  not  working  as  I  should 
be  working  —  wasting  time. 

Wasting  time.  The  old  cry  —  the  first  and  last  cry 
—  Why  do  ye  tarry?  Ah,  why  indeed?  My  deepest  de- 
sire is  to  be  a  writer,  to  have  "  a  body  of  work  "  done. 
And  there  the  work  is,  there  the  stories  wait  for  me, 
grow  tired,  wilt,  fade,  because  I  will  not  come.  And  I 
hear  and  I  acknowledge  them,  and  still  I  go  on  sitting 
at  the  window,  playing  with  the  ball  of  wool.  What  is 
to  be  done? 


199  = 


Journal   IQ2I 

I  must  make  another  effort  —  at  once.  I  must  begin 
all  over  again.  I  must  try  and  write  simply,  fully, 
freely,  from  my  heart.  Quietly,  caring  nothing  for 
success  or  failure,  but  just  going  on. 

I  must  keep  this  book  so  that  I  have  a  record  of 
what  I  do  each  week.  (Here  a  word.  As  I  re-read  At 
the  Bay  in  proof,  it  seemed  to  me  flat,  dull,  and  not  a 
success  at  all.  I  was  very  much  ashamed  of  it.  I  am.) 
But  now  to  resolve !  And  especially  to  keep  in  touch 
with  Life  —  with  the  sky  and  this  moon,  these  stars, 
these  cold,  candid  peaks. 

November  16.  To  go  to  Sierre,  if  it  goes  on  like  this 
...  or  to  —  or  to  — 

November  21.  Since  then  [i.e.  since  writing  the  entry 
of  October  16,  1921]  I  have  only  written  The  Doll's 
House.  A  bad  spell  has  been  on  me.  I  have  begun  two 
stories,1  but  then  I  told  them  and  they  felt  betrayed. 
It  is  absolutely  fatal  to  give  way  to  this  temptation. . . . 
To-day  I  began  to  write,  seriously,  The  Weak  Heart, 
—  a  story  which  fascinates  me  deeply.  What  I  feel  it 
needs  so  peculiarly  is  a  very  subtle  variation  of '  tense  ' 
from  the  present  to  the  past  and  back  again  —  and 
softness,  lightness,  and  the  feeling  that  all  is  in  bud, 
with  a  play  of  humour  over  the  character  of  Ronnie. 
And  the  feeling  of  the  Thorndon  Baths,  the  wet, 
moist,  oozy  . .  .  no,  I  know  how  it  must  be  done. 

1  Fragments  of  these  two  stories,  Widowed  and  Second  Violin,  and  of 
Weak  Heart,  are  in  the  "  Doves'  Nest." 

=    200   = 


A   Prayer 

May  I  be  found  worthy  to  do  it!  Lord,  make  me 
crystal  clear  for  thy  light  to  shine  through ! 

November  24.  These  last  days  I  have  been  awfully 
rebellious.  Longing  for  something.  I  feel  uprooted.  I 
want  things  that  J.  can  so  easily  do  without,  that 
aren't  natural  to  him.  I  long  for  them.  But  then, 
stronger  than  all  these  desires,  is  the  other,  which  is 
to  make  good  before  I  do  anything  else.  The  sooner 
the  books  are  written,  the  sooner  I  shall  be  well,  the 
sooner  my  wishes  will  be  in  sight  of  fulfilment.  That 
is  sober  truth,  of  course.  As  a  pure  matter  of  fact  I 
consider  this  enforced  confinement  here  as  God-given. 
But,  on  the  other  hand,  I  must  make  the  most  of  it 
quickly.  It  is  not  unlimited  any  more  than  anything 
else  is.  Oh,  why  —  oh,  why  isn't  anything  unlimited? 
Why  am  I  troubled  every  single  day  of  my  life  by  the 
nearness  of  death  and  its  inevitability?  I  am  really 
diseased  on  that  point.  And  I  can't  speak  of  it.  If  I  tell 
J.  it  makes  him  unhappy.  If  I  don't  tell  him,  it  leaves 
me  to  fight  it.  I  am  tired  of  the  battle.  No  one  knows 
how  tired. 

To-night,  when  the  evening-star  shone  through  the 
side-window  and  the  mountains  were  so  lovely,  I  sat 
there  thinking  of  death.  Of  all  there  was  to  do  —  of 
Life,  which  is  so  lovely  —  and  of  the  fact  that  my  body 
is  a  prison.  But  this  state  of  mind  is  evil.  It  is  only  by 
acknowledging  that  I,  being  what  I  am,  had  to  suffer 
this  in  order  to  do  the  work  I  am  here  to  perform.  It 
is  only  by  acknowledging  it,  by  being  thankful  that 

=  201  = 


Journal   IQ2I 

work  was  not  taken  away  from  me,  that  I  shall  re- 
cover. I  am  weak  where  I  must  be  strong. 

And  to-day  —  Saturday  —  less  than  ever.  But  no 
matter.  I  have  progressed  ...  a  little.  I  have  realised 
what  it  is  to  be  done  —  the  strange  barrier  to  be 
crossed  from  thinking  it  to  writing  it.  .  .  .  Daphne. 

[On  the  next  page  begins  the  unfinished  MS.  of  Daphne,  in- 
cluded in  "  The  Doves'  Nest."] 

SHAKESPEARE  NOTES 

All's  Well  that  Ends  Well 

The  First  Lord  is  worth  attending  to.  One  could 
have  thought  that  his  speeches  and  those  of  the  Sec- 
ond Lord  would  have  been  interchangeable ;  but  he  is 
a  very  definite,  quick-cut  character.  Take,  for  ex- 
ample, the  talk  between  the  two  in  Act  IV  Scene  IIL 
The  Second  Lord  asks  him  to  let  what  he  is  going  to 
tell  dwell  darkly  with  him. 

First  Lord:  'When  you  have  spoken  it,  'tis  dead, 
and  I  am  the  grave  of  it.' 

And  then  his  comment : 

'  How  mightily  sometimes  we  make  us  comforts  of 
our  losses.' 

And  this  is  most  excellent : 

'  The  web  of  our  life  is  of  a  mingled  yarn,  good  and 
ill  together ;  our  virtues  would  be  proud  if  our  faults 
whipped  them  not;  and  our  faults  would  despair  if 
they  were  not  cherished  by  our  virtues.' 

I  like  the  temper  of  that  extremely  —  and  does  it 

=  202  = 


Shakespeare 

not  reveal  the  man  ?  Disillusioned  and  yet  —  amused 

—  worldly,  and  yet  he  has  feeling.  But  I  see  him  as  — 
quick,  full  of  Life,  and  marvellously  at  his  ease  with 
his  company,  his  surroundings,  his  own  condition, 
and  the  whole  small,  solid  earth.  He  is  like  a  man  on 
shipboard  who  is  inclined  to  straddle  just  to  show 
(but  not  to  show  off)  how  well  his  sea-legs  serve 
him.  .  .  . 

The  Clown  —  "a  shrewd  knave  and  an  unhappy  " 

—  comes  to  tell  the  Countess  of  the  arrival  of  Bertram 
and  his  soldiers. 

*  Faith,  there's  a  dozen  of  'em,  with  delicate  fine 
hats  and  most  courteous  feathers,  that  bow  and  nod 
the  head  at  every  man.' 

In  that  phrase  there  is  all  the  charm  of  soldiers  on 
prancing,  jingling,  dancing  horses.  It  is  a  veritable 
little  pageant.  With  what  an  air  the  haughty  (and  in- 
tolerable) Bertram  wears  his  two-pile  velvet  patch  — 
with  what  disdain  his  hand  in  the  white  laced  French 
glove  tightens  upon  the  tight  rein  of  his  silver  charger. 
Wonderfully  sunny,  with  a  little  breeze.  And  the 
Clown,  of  course,  sees  the  humour  of  this  conceit.  .  .  . 

Parolles  is  a  lovable  creature,  a  brave  little  cock- 
sparrow  of  a  ruffian. 

...  *  I  am  now  sir,  muddied  in  Fortune's  mood, 
and  smell  somewhat  strong  of  her  strong  dis- 
pleasure.' 

I  must  say  Helena  is  a  terrifying  female.  Her  virtue, 
her  persistence,  her  pegging  away  after  the  odious 
Bertram  (and  disguised  as  a  pilgrim  —  so  typical!) 

=  203  = 


Journal   IQ2I 

and  then  telling  the  whole  story  to  that  good  widow- 
woman!  And  that  tame  fish  Diana.  As  to  lying  in 
Diana's  bed  and  enjoying  the  embraces  meant  for 
Diana  —  well,  I  know  nothing  more  sickening.  It 
would  take  a  respectable  woman  to  do  such  a  thing. 
The  worst  of  it  is  I  can  so  well  imagine  . . .  for  instance 
acting  in  precisely  that  way,  and  giving  Diana  a  pres- 
ent afterwards.  What  a  cup  of  tea  the  widow  and  D. 
must  have  enjoyed  while  it  was  taking  place,  or  did  D. 
at  the  last  moment  want  to  cry  off  the  bargain?  But 
to  forgive  such  a  woman !  Yet  Bertram  would.  There's 
an  espece  de  mothers-boyisme  in  him  which  makes 
him  stupid  enough  for  anything. 

The  Old  King  is  a  queer  old  card  —  he  seems  to 
have  a  mania  for  bestowing  husbands.  As  if  the  one 
fiasco  were  not  enough,  Diana  has  no  sooner  explained 
herself  than  he  begins : 

"  If  thou  be'st  yet  a  fresh  uncropped  flower 
Choose  thou  thy  husband,  and  I'll  pay  thy  dower." 

I  think  Shakespeare  must  have  seen  the  humour  of 
that.  It  just  —  at  the  very  last  moment  of  the  play, 
puts  breath  into  the  old  fool. 

Hamlet 

Coleridge  on  Hamlet. '  He  plays  that  subtle  trick  of 
pretending  to  act  only  when  he  is  very  near  being  what 
he  acts.' 

...  So  do  we  all  begin  by  acting  and  the  nearer  we 
are  to  what  we  would  be  the  more  perfect  our  disguise. 

=  204  = 


H  amlet 


Finally  there  comes  the  moment  when  we  are  no 
longer  acting;  it  may  even  catch  us  by  surprise.  We 
may  look  in  amazement  at  our  no  longer  borrowed 
plumage.  The  two  have  merged ;  that  which  we  put  on 
has  joined  that  which  was ;  acting  has  become  action. 
The  soul  has  accepted  this  livery  for  its  own  after  a 
time  of  trying  on  and  approving. 

To  act  ...  .to  see  ourselves  in  the  part  —  to  make  a 
larger  gesture  than  would  be  ours  in  life  —  to  declaim, 
to  pronounce,  to  even  exaggerate,  to  persuade  our- 
selves (?)  or  others  (?)  To  put  ourselves  in  heart?  To 
do  more  than  is  necessary  in  order  that  we  may  ac- 
complish ce  qu'il  faut. 

And  then  Hamlet  is  lonely.  The  solitary  person  al- 
ways acts. 

But  I  could  write  a  thousand  pages  about  Hamlets. 

Mad  Scene.  If  one  looks  at  it  with  a  cold  eye  is 
really  very  poor.  It  depends  entirely  for  its  effect  upon 
wispy  Ophelia.  The  cardboard  King  and  Queen  are  of 
course  only  lookers-on.  They  don't  care  a  halfpenny. 
I  think  the  Queen  is  privately  rather  surprised  at  a 
verse  or  two  of  her  songs. . . .  And  who  can  believe  that 
a  solitary  violet  withered  when  that  silly  fussy  old 
pomposity  died?  And  who  can  believe  that  Ophelia 
really  loved  him,  and  wasn't  thankful  to  think  how 
peaceful  breakfast  would  be  without  his  preaching? 

The  Queen's  speech  after  Ophelia's  death  is  ex- 
asperating to  one's  sense  of  poetic  truth.  If  no  one  saw 
it  happen  —  if  she  wasn't  found  until  she  was  drowned, 
how  does  the  Queen  know  how  it  happened?  Dear 


=  205  = 


Journal  iQ2i 

Shakespeare  has  been  to  the  Royal  Academy  .  .  .  for 
his  picture. 

Miranda  and  Juliet 

To  say  that  Juliet  and  Miranda  might  very  well  be 
one  seems  to  me  to  show  a  lamentable  want  of  percep- 
tion. Innocent,  early-morning-of-the-world  Miranda, 
that  fair  island  still  half  dreaming  in  a  golden  haze  — 
lapped  about  with  little  joyful  hurrying  waves  of 
love. . . .  And  small,  frail  Juliet,  leaning  upon  the  dark 
—  a  flower  that  is  turned  to  the  moon  and  closes,  re- 
luctant, at  chill  dawn.  It  is  not  even  her  Spring.  It  is 
her  time  for  dreaming :  too  soon  for  love.  There  is  a 
Spring  that  comes  before  the  real  Spring  and  so  there 
is  a  love  —  a  false  Love.  It  is  incarnate  in  Juliet. 

Romeo  and  Juliet 
When  the  old  nurse  cackles  of  leaning  against  the 
dove-house  wall  it's  just  as  though  a  beam  of  sunlight 
struck  through  the  curtains  and  discovered  her  sitting 
there  in  the  warmth  with  a  tiny  staggerer.  One  posi- 
tively feels  the  warmth  of  the  sunny  wall. . . . 

Twelfth  Night 
Malvolio's  "or  .  .  .  play  with  some  rich  jewel." 
There  speaks  the  envious  servant-heart  that  covets  his 
master's  possessions.  I  see  him  stroking  the  cloth  with 
a  sigh  as  he  puts  away  his  master's  coat  —  holding  up 
to  the  light  or  to  his  fingers  the  jewel  before  he  snaps 
it  into  its  ivory  case.  I  see  the  servant  copying  the  mas- 
ter's expression  as  he  looks  in  the  master's  mirror. 

=  206  = 


Anthony   and  Cleopatra 


And  that  ..."  having  risen  from  a  day  bed  where 
I  have  left  Olivia  sleeping."  Oh,  doesn't  that  reveal  the 
thoughts  of  all  those  strange  creatures  who  attend 
upon  the  lives  of  others ! 

Anthony  and  Cleopatra 

Act  I.  Scene  i. 

"  The  triple  pillars  of  the  world  .  .  . 
"  The  wide  arch  of  the  ranged  empire  . .  ." 
"  To-night  we'll  wander  through  the  streets  and  note 
The  qualities  of  people."   (That  is  so  true  a  pleasure  of 
lovers.) 

Act  I.  Scene  2. 

"  A  Roman  thought  hath  struck  him  .  .  ." 
"Ah,  then  we  bring  forth  weeds 
When  our  quick  minds  lie  still  .  .  ." 

Enobarbus  constantly  amazes  me,  e.g.  his  first 
speeches  with  Anthony  about  Cleopatra's  celerity  in 
dying. 

"  Your  old  smock  brings  forth  a  new  petticoat." 

Act  I.  Scene  3.  Like  Scene  2.  (1)  "Saw  you  my 
lord?"  (2)  "Where  is  he?"  The  married  woman. 
There's  jealousy!  And  then  her  fury  that  he's  not 
more  upset  at  Fulvia's  death ! '  Now  I  know  how  you'll 
behave  when  I  die ! ' 

These  are  beautiful  lines  of  Anthony's : 

"  Our  separation  so  abides  and  flies 
That  thou,  residing  here,  goes  yet  with  me, 
And  I,  hence  fleeing,  here  remain  with  thee." 

=  207  = 


Journal   1921 


Act  I.  Scene  4. 

"  Like  to  a  vagabond  flag  upon  the  stream 
Goes  to  and  back,  lackeying  the  varying  tide 
To  rot  itself  with  motion." 

Marvellous  words!  I  can  apply  them.  There  is  a 
short  story.  And  then  it  seems  that  the  weed  gets 
caught  up  and  it  sinks ;  it  is  gone  out  to  sea  and  lost. 
But  comes  a  day,  a  like  tide,  a  like  occasion,  and  it 
reappears  more  sickeningly  rotten  still !  Shall  he?  Will 
he?  Are  there  any  letters?  No  letters?  The  post?  Does 
he  miss  me?  No.  Then  sweep  it  all  out  to  sea.  Clear 
the  water  for  ever !  Let  me  write  this  one  day. 

"  His  cheek  so  much  as  lanked  not."  (Economy  of  utterance.) 

Act  III.  The  short  scene  between  Anthony  and  the 
Soothsayer  is  very  remarkable.  It  explains  the  tone  of 
Caesar's  remarks  to  Anthony.  .  .  .  And  Anthony's 
concluding  speech  shows  his  uneasiness  at  the  truth 
of  it.  He'll  go  to  Egypt.  He'll  go  where  his  weakness  is 
praised  for  strength.  There's  a  hankering  after  Egypt 
between  the  lines. 

Scene  5.  "Tawny-finned  fishes  .  .  .  their  shiny 
jaws.  .  .  ."  and  the  adjectives  seem  part  of  the  nouns 
when  Shakespeare  uses  them.  They  grace  them  so 
beautifully,  attend  and  adorn  so  modestly,  and  yet 
with  such  skill.  It  so  often  happens  with  lesser  writers 
that  we  are  more  conscious  of  the  servants  than  we  are 
of  the  masters,  and  quite  forget  that  their  office  is  to 
serve,  to  enlarge,  to  amplify  the  power  of  the  master.. 

=  208  = 


Anthony   and   Cleopatra 


"  Ram  thou  thy  fruitful  tidings  in  my  ears 
That  long  time  have  been  barren." 

Good  lines !  And  another  example  of  the  choice  of  the 
place  of  words.  I  suppose  it  was  instinctive.  But '  fruit- 
ful '  seems  to  be  just  where  it  ought  to  be,  to  be  re- 
solved (musically  speaking)  by  the  word  '  barren ' 
One  reads  '  fruitful '  expecting  '  barren  '  almost  from 
the  "  sound-sense." 

"  '  But  yet '  is  as  a  jailor  to  bring  forth 
Some  monstrous  malefactor." 

There's  matter  indeed !  Does  not  that  give  the  pause 
that  always  follows  those  hateful  words.  '  But  yet '  — 
and  one  waits.  And  both  look  towards  the  slowly  open- 
ing door.  What  is  coming  out  ?  And  sometimes  there's 
a  sigh  of  relief  after.  Well,  it  was  nothing  so  very  aw- 
ful. The  gaol-mouse,  so  to  speak,  comes  mousing 
through  and  cleans  his  face  with  his  paw. 
"  I  am  pale,  Charmian." 

Reminds  me  of  Mary  Shelley.  "  Byron  had  never 
seen  any  one  so  pale  as  I." 

"  Since  I  myself 
Have  given  myself  the  cause." 

What  does  that  mean  exactly?  That  she  sent  Anthony 
away?  or  let  Anthony  go ? 

"  In  praising  Anthony  I  have  dispraised  Caesar  .  .  . 
I  am  paid  for  it  now." 

A  creature  like  Cleopatra  always  expects  to  be  paid 
for  things. 

=  209  = 


1 922 

January  1. 1  dreamed  I  sailed  to  Egypt  with  Grandma 

—  a  very  white  boat. 

Cold,  still.  The  gale  last  night  has  blown  nearly  all 
the  snow  off  the  trees ;  only  big,  frozen-looking  lumps 
remain.  In  the  wood  where  the  snow  is  thick,  bars  of 
sunlight  lay  like  pale  fire. 

I  have  left  undone  those  things  I  ought  to  have  done 
and  I  have  done  those  things  which  I  ought  not  to 
have  done,  e.g.  violent  impatience  with  L.M. 

Wrote  The  Doves'  Nest  this  afternoon.  I  was  in  no 
mood  to  write ;  it  seemed  impossible.  Yet  when  I  had 
finished  three  pages,  they  were  all  right.  This  is  a  proof 
(never  to  be  too  often  proved)  that  once  one  has 
thought  out  a  story  nothing  remains  but  the  labour. 

Wing  Lee  x  disappeared  for  the  day.  Read  W.J.D.'s 
poems.  I  feel  very  near  to  him  in  mind. 

I  want  to  remember  how  the  light  fades  from  a  room 

—  and  one  fades  with  it,  is  expunged,  sitting  still, 
knees  together,  hands  in  pocket.  .  .  . 

January  2.  Little  round  birds  in  the  fir-tree  at  the  side 
window,  scouring  the  tree  for  food.  I  crumbled  a  piece 

1  Wing  Lee,  alias  Wingley,  was  K.M.'s  little  black  and  white  cat. 
Wing  Lee  was  his  original  name.  It  was  taken  from  one  of  K.M.'s  large 
repertory  of  comic  songs :  "  Wing  Lee  bought  a  clock  the  other  day,  Just 
because  it  kept  rag-time  .  .  ." 

=   2IO  = 


Rested 


of  bread,  but  though  the  crumbs  fell  in  the  branches 
only  two  found  them.  There  was  a  strange  remoteness 
in  the  air,  the  scene,  the  winter  cheeping.  In  the  eve- 
ning, for  the  first  time  for 1  felt  rested.  I  sat  up  in 

bed  and  discovered  I  was  singing  within.  Even  the 
sound  of  the  wind  is  different.  It  is  joyful,  not  ominous 
and  black.  Dark  looks  in  at  the  window  and  is  only 
black  dark.  In  the  afternoon  it  came  on  to  rain,  long 
glancing  rain,  falling  aslant. 

I  have  not  done  the  work  I  should  have  done.  I  shirk 
the  lunch  party  [see  The  Doves'  Nest],  This  is  very 
bad.  In  fact  I  am  disgusted  with  myself.  There  must 
be  a  change  from  now  on.  What  I  chiefly  admire  in 
Jane  Austen  is  that  what  she  promises,  she  performs, 
i.e.  if  Sir  T.  is  to  arrive,  we  have  his  arrival  at  length, 
and  it's  excellent  and  exceeds  our  expectations.  This 
is  rare ;  it  is  also  my  very  weakest  point.  Easy  to  see 
why.  .  . . 

January  3.  I  dreamed  I  was  at  the  Strand  Palace, — 
having  married  M.D.  —  big  blonde  —  in  quantities  of 
white  satin. . . . 

There  was  a  great  deal  more  snow  this  morning ;  it 
was  very  soft,  '  like  wool.'  The  cocoanut  was  bought 
and  sawn  in  half  and  hung  from  J.'s  balcony.  The  milk 
came  tinkling  out  of  the  nut  in  brightest  drops  —  not 
white  milk.  This  was  a  profound  surprise.  The  flesh  of 
the  nut  is  very  lovely  —  so  pure  white.  But  it  was  that 
dewy,  sweet  liquid  which  made  the  marvel.  Whence 
came  it?  It  took  one  to  the  island. 

=  211  = 


Journal  IQ22 

I  read  The  Tempest.  The  papers  came.  I  over-read 
them.  Tell  the  truth.  I  did  no  work.  In  fact  I  was  more 
idle  and  hateful  than  ever.  Full  of  sin.  Why?  "  Oh  self, 
oh  self,  wake  from  thy  common  sleep."  And  the  worst 
of  it  is  I  feel  so  much  better  in  health.  It  is  shameful ! 
The  Tempest  seems  to  me  astonishing  this  time.  When 
one  reads  the  same  play  again,  it  is  never  the  same 
play. 

January  4.  Dreamed  of  M.S.  An  important  dream; 
its  tone  was  important.  That  gallery  over  the  sea  and 
my  "  Isn't  it  beautiful?  "  and  his  weary  "  No  doubt." 
His  definition  of  the  two  kinds  of  women.  .  . . 

But  I  was  not  so  wicked  to-day.  I  have  read  a  good 
deal  of  Cosmic  Anatomy  and  understood  it  far  better. 
Yes,  such  a  book  does  fascinate  me.  Why  does  J.  hate 
it  so? 

To  get  a  glimpse  of  the  relation  of  things  —  to  fol- 
low that  relation  and  find  it  remains  true  through 
the  ages  enlarges  my  little  mind  as  nothing  else  do.  It's 
only  a  greater  view  of  psychology.  It  helps  me  with  my 
writing,  for  instance,  to  know  that  hot  +  bun  may 
mean  Taurus,  Pradhana,  substance.  No,  that's  not 
really  what  attracts  me ;  it's  that  reactions  to  certain 
causes  and  effects  always  have  been  the  same.  It 
wasn't  for  nothing  Constantia  *  chose  the  moon  and 
water,  for  instance! 

Read  Shakespeare.  The  snow  is  thicker,  it  clings  to 
the  branches  like  white  new-born  puppies. 

1  One  of  the  sisters  in  The  Daughters  of  the  late  Colonel. 
=   212   = 


Snow 

January  5.  A  long  typical  boat  dream.  I  was,  as  usual, 
going  to  N.Z.  But  for  the  first  time  my  stepmother  was 
very  friendly  —  so  nice.  I  loved  her.  A  tragic  dream  as 
regards  L.M.  She  disappeared,  and  it  was  too  late  to 
find  her  or  tell  her  to  come  back  at  last. 

Read  Cosmic  Anatomy.  I  managed  to  work  a  little. 
Broke  through.  This  is  a  great  relief.  J.  and  I  put  out 
food  for  the  birds.  When  I  went  to  the  window  all  the 
food  was  gone,  but  there  was  the  tiny  print  of  their 
feet  on  the  sill.  J.  brought  up  the  half  cocoanut  and 
sprinkled  crumbs  as  well.  Very  soon,  terrified,  how- 
ever, one  came,  then  another,  then  a  third,  balanced  on 
the  cocoanut.  They  are  precious  little  atoms. 

It  still  snows.  I  think  I  hate  snow,  downright  hate 
it.  There  is  something  stupefying  in  it,  a  kind  of  '  You 
must  be  worse  before  you're  better,'  and  down  it  spins. 
I  love,  I  long  for  the  fertile  earth.  How  I  have  longed 
for  the  South  of  France  this  year !  So  do  I  now. 

Soundly  rated  L.M.  about  food  and  clothing.  She 
has  a  food  '  complex.'  J.  and  I  read  Mansfield  Park 
with  great  enjoyment.  I  wonder  if  J.  is  as  content  as 
he  appears  ?  It  seems  too  good  to  be  true. 

January  6.  The  first  quarter  of  the  Moon.  Jour  de 
fete.  The  Christmas  Tree  is  dismantled. 

I  had  a  very  bad  night  and  did  not  fall  deeply  asleep 
enough  to  dream. 

In  the  morning,  all  white,  all  dim  and  cold,  and 
snow  still  falling.  While  waiting  in  my  room  I  watched 
the  terrific  efforts  of  a  little  bird  to  peck  through  the 

=  213  = 


Journal   1922 

ice  and  get  at  the  sweet  food  of  the  nut.  He  succeeded. 
But  why  must  he  so  strive? 

My  heart  is  always  bad  to-day.  It  is  the  cold.  It 
feels  congested,  and  I  am  uneasy,  or  rather  my  body 
is  —  vile  feeling.  I  cough. 

Read  Shakespeare,  read  Cosmic  Anatomy,  read 
The  Oxford  Dictionary.  Wrote.  But  nothing  like 
enough. 

In  the  afternoon  W came  to  tea.  I  suspect  he 

is  timid,  fearful  and  deeply  kind.  Deep  within  that 
vast  substance  lurks  the  seed.  That  is  not  sentimental. 
He  wished  me  sun  as  he  left.  I  felt  his  wish  had  power 
and  was  a  blessing.  One  can't  be  mistaken  in  such 
things.  He  is  in  his  stockings  —  pea-green  and  red!  J. 
came  up  after  ski-ing,  excessively  handsome  —  a  glo- 
rious object,  no  less.  I  never  saw  a  more  splendid 
figure. 

I  am  wearing  my  ring  on  my  middle  ringer  as  a  re- 
minder not  to  be  so  base.  We  shall  see.  .  .  . 

January  7.  It  ceased  snowing,  and  a  deep,  almost 
gentian  blue  sky  showed.  The  snow  lay  heaped  on  the 
trees,  big  blobs  of  snow,  like  whipped  cream.  It  was 
very  cold,  but,  I  suppose,  beautiful.  I  cannot  see  this 
snow  as  anything  but  hateful.  So  it  is. 

My  birds  have  made  a  number  of  little  attacks  on 
the  cocoanut,  but  it  is  still  frozen.  I  read  Cosmic 
Anatomy,  Shakespeare  and  the  Bible.  Jonah.  Very 
nice  about  the  gourd,  and  also  on  his  journey,  "  pay- 
ing the  fare  thereof." 

=  214  = 


Dreams 

I  wrote  at  my  story,  but  did  not  finish  the  lunch 
party  as  I  ought  have  to  done.  How  very  bad  this  is ! 
Had  a  long  talk  with  L.M.  and  suddenly  saw  her  again 
as  a  figure  in  a  story.  She  resolves  into  so  many.  I 
could  write  books  about  her  alone ! 

I  dreamed  a  long  dream.  Chummie  was  young 
again,  so  was  Jeanne.  Mother  was  alive.  We 
were  going  through  many  strange  rooms  —  up  in 
lifts,  alighting  in  lounges.  It  was  all  vaguely  for- 
eign. 

January  8.  All  night  dreamed  of  visiting  houses,  bare 
rooms,  No.  39,  going  up  and  down  in  lifts,  etc. 

Heavily,  more  heavily  than  ever,  falls  the  snow.  It 
is  hypnotising.  One  looks,  wonders  vaguely  how  much 
has  fallen  and  how  much  will  fall  and  —  looks  again. 
Bandaged  J.'s  fingers.  The  Mercury  came  with  At  the 
Bay.  I  am  very  unsatisfied. 

In  the  afternoon  J.  and  I  played  cribbage,  with  nuts 
for  counters.  I  recalled  the  fact  that  I  used  to  play  so 
often  with  such  intense  —  Heavens  with  what  feel- 
ings !  —  in  the  drawing-room  at  Carlton  Hill  while 
T played  the  piano.  But  it  meant  absolutely  noth- 
ing. J.  giving  me  a  bad  nut  and  me  paying  him  the  bad 
nut  again  was  all  that  really  mattered. 

After  tea  we  knitted  and  talked  and  then  read.  We 
were  idle  —  snow-bound.  One  feels  there  is  nothing 
to  be  done  while  this  goes  on. 

Had  a  letter  from  The  Sketch  asking  for  work.  I 
must  obey.  J.  and  I  talked  Paris  yesterday  and  he 

=  215  = 


Journal   IQ22 

quite  understood.  This  is  a  proof  that  one  must  be 
calm  and  explain  and  be  true.  Remember  that ! 

January  9.  Snow.  The  vegetable  garden  fence  was  all 

but  gone.  H came  and  said  there  was  between 

6-7  feet  of  snow.  He  was  very  cheerful  and  friendly. 

Off  his  guard,  speaking  of  Miss  S he  declared, 

"  Well,  the  fact  is  she  is  not  normal.  And  anyone  who 
is  not  normal  I  call  mad.  She  is  unconventional,  that 
is  to  say,  and  people  who  are  that  are  no  good  to  any- 
one except  themselves."  When  he  said  "  mad,"  a  look 
came  into  his  eyes  —  a  flash  of  power  —  and  he  swung 
the  stethoscope,  then  picked  up  my  fan  and  rattled  it 
open. 

Read  and  knitted  and  played  cards.  A  long  letter 
from  S.  I  want  to  believe  all  he  says  about  my  story. 
He  does  see  what  I  meant.  He  does  not  see  it  as  a 
set  of  trivial  happenings  just  thrown  together.  This 
is  enough  to  be  deeply  grateful  for  —  more  than 
others  will  see.  But  I  have  this  continual  longing 
to  write  something  with  all  my  power,  all  my  force 
in  it. 

January  10.  Dreamed  I  was  back  in  New  Zealand. 

Got  up  to-day.  It  was  fine.  The  sun  shone  and 
melted  the  last  trace  of  snow  from  the  trees,  from  the 
roof.  The  drops  were  not  like  raindrops,  but  bigger, 
softer,  more  exquisite.  They  made  one  realise  how  one 
loves  the  fertile  earth  and  hates  this  snow-bound  cold 
substitute. 

=  216  = 


"The   Doll's  House" 


The  men  worked  outside  on  the  snowy  road,  trying 
to  raise  the  telegraph  pole.  Before  they  began  they  had 
lunch  out  of  a  paper,  sitting  astride  the  pole.  It  is  very 
beautiful  to  see  people  sharing  food.  Cutting  bread 
and  passing  the  loaf,  especially  cutting  bread  in  that 
age-old  way,  with  a  clasp-knife.  Afterwards  one  got 
up  in  a  tree  and  sat  among  the  branches  working  from 
there,  while  the  other  lifted.  The  one  in  the  tree  turned 
into  a  kind  of  bird,  as  all  people  do  in  trees  —  chuck- 
led, laughed  out,  peered  from  among  the  branches, 
careless.  At-tend!  Ar-ret!  Al-lez! 

January  n.  In  bed  again.  Heard  from  Pinker  The 
Dial  has  taken  The  Doll's  House.  Wrote  and  finished 
A  Cup  of  Tea.  It  took  about  4-5  hours.  In  the  after- 
noon M.  came.  She  looked  fascinating  in  her  black 
suit,  something  between  a  Bishop  and  a  Fly.  She  spoke 
of  my  "  pretty  little  story  "  in  the  Mercury.  All  the 
while  she  was  here  I  was  conscious  of  a  falsity. 
We  said  things  we  meant;  we  were  sincere,  but  at 
the  back  there  was  nothing  but  falsity.  It  was  very 
horrible.  I  do  not  want  ever  to  see  her  or  hear 
from  her  again.  When  she  said  she  would  not  come 
often,  I  wanted  to  cry  Finito!  No,  she  is  not  my 
friend. 

There  is  no  feeling  to  be  compared  with  the  feeling 
of  having  written  and  finished  a  story.  I  did  not  go  to 
sleep,  but  nothing  mattered.  There  it  was,  new  and 
complete. 

Dreamed  last  night  of  a  voyage  to  America. 

=  217  = 


Journal   IQ22 

January  12.  A  vile  cold  day.  The  parcel  came  from  M. 
But  when  one  compares  it  with  A.'s  exquisite  coat.  .  .  . 

J.  and  I '  typed.'  I  hate  dictating ;  but  the  story  still 
seems  to  me  to  be  good.  Is  it? 

All  the  whole  time  at  the  back  of  my  mind  slumbers 
not  nor  sleeps  the  idea  of  Paris,  and  I  begin  to  plan 

what  I  will  do  when Can  it  be  true  ?  What  shall 

I  do  to  express  my  thanks  ?  I  want  to  adopt  a  Russian 
baby,  call  him  Anton,  and  bring  him  up  as  mine,  with 
K.  for  a  godfather  and  Mme.  Tchehov  for  a  god- 
mother. Such  is  my  dream. 

I  don't  feel  so  sinful  this  day  as  I  did,  because  I  have 
written  something  and  the  tide  is  still  high.  The  an- 
cient landmarks  are  covered.  Ah !  but  to  write  better ! 
Let  me  write  better,  more  deeply,  more  largely. 

Baleful  icicles  hang  in  a  fringe  outside  our  window 
pane. 

January  13.  Heard  from  B.  Her  letter  was  almost 
frightening.  It  brought  back  the  inexplicable  past.  It 
flashed  into  my  mind  too  that  she  must  have  a  large 
number  of  letters  of  mine  which  don't  bear  thinking 
about.  In  some  way  I  fear  her.  I  feared  her  at  the  rue 
de  Tournon.  There  was  a  peculiar  recklessness  in  her 
manner  and  in  her  tones  which  made  me  feel  she 
would  recognise  no  barriers  at  all.  At  the  same  time, 
of  course,  one  is  fascinated. 

Wrote  to  K.  Began  a  new  story,  but  it  went  too 
slowly.  J.  typed  for  me.  I  am  again  held  up  by  letters 
to  write.  Letters  are  the  real  curse  of  my  existence.  I 

=  218  = 


Dreams 

hate  to  write  them :  I  have  to.  If  I  don't,  there  they  are 
—  the  great  guilty  gates  barring  my  way. 

H.  came  and  suggested  my  heart  condition  was 
caused  by  the  failure  to  expand  the  diaphragm.  Then 
why,  in  that  case,  not  learn  to  expand  it? 

January  14. 1  got  up  to-day  and  felt  better.  It  was  in- 
tensely cold. 

M.  came  in  the  afternoon.  She  and  I  were  alone. 
She  wore  a  little  blue  hood  fastened  under  the  chin 
with  a  diamond  clasp.  She  looked  like  a  very  ancient 
drawing.  She  suggested  that  if  I  did  become  cured,  I 
might  no  longer  write.  .  . . 

Dreamed  last  night  I  was  in  a  ship,  with  the  most 
superb,  unearthly  (in  the  heavenly  sense)  seas  break- 
ing. Deep,  almost  violet  blue  waves  with  high  foamy 
crests,  and  this  white  foam  bore  down  on  the  blue  in 
long  curls.  It  was  a  marvellous  sight.  The  dream  was 
about  Chummie.  He  had  married  a  girl  without  per- 
mission and  Father  and  Mother  were  in  despair.  I 
'  realised  '  it  was  to  be ;  what  would  have  happened  if 
he  had  not  died. 

Wingley  made  a  dash  at  the  bird  window  to-day. 

January  15.  Dreamed  I  was  shopping,  buying  under- 
clothes in  Cook's  and  then  in  Warnock's.1  But  the 
dream  ended  horribly. 

Another  chill,  bloodless  day.  I  got  up,  but  all  was 
difficult.  In  the  afternoon  J.  went  down  the  mountain 
and  came  back  in  the  evening  with  a  letter  for  me  from 

1  These  are  or  were  shops  in  Wellington,  N.Z. 
=   219   = 


Journal  IQ22 

M. ;  so  generous,  so  sweet  a  letter  that  I  am  ashamed 
of  what  I  said  or  thought  the  other  day. 

I  have  worked  to-day  in  discomfort  —  not  half 
enough.  I  could  have  written  a  whole  story.  Saw  for 
the  first  time  an  exquisite  little  crested  bird.  Its  call  is 
a  trill,  a  shake,  marvellously  delightful.  It  was  very 
shy,  though,  and  never  had  the  courage  to  stop  and 
eat.  Saw  people  in  sleighs  and  on  luges.  Snow  is  very 
blue.  The  icicles  at  dawn  this  morning  were  the  colour 
of  opals — blue  lit  with  fire.  M.  lent  us  Will  Shake- 
speare. Really  awful  stuff !  I  had  better  keep  this  for  a 
sign. 

January  16.  A  wonderfully  pleasant  dream  about 
Paris.  All  went  so  well.  The  Doctor  and  his  friends  all 
had  the  same  atmosphere.  It  was  good,  kind,  quietly 
happy.  I  don't  know  when  I've  had  a  dream  more  de- 
lightful. 

But  the  day  has  not  been  delightful.  On  the  con- 
trary. It  snowed  heavily,  it  was  bitter  cold,  and  my 
congestion  worse  than  ever.  I  have  been  in  pain  and 
discomfort  all  day.  My  lung  creaks.  I  have  done  no 
work.  After  tea  I  simply  went  to  sleep  out  of  sheer 
inertia.  I  am  in  a  slough  of  despond  to-day,  and  like 
everybody  in  such  an  ugly  place,  I  am  ugly,  I  feel  ugly. 
It  is  the  triumph  of  matter  over  spirit.  This  must  not 
be.  To-morrow  at  all  costs  (here  I  swear)  I  shall  write 
a  story.  This  is  my  first  resolution  ...  in  this  journal. 
I  dare  not  break  it.  Tomlinson's  letter  to  J.  came  yes- 

=  220  = 


Time 

terday.  It  was  a  beautiful  letter  and  not  to  be  for- 
gotten. But  why  am  I  so  bad? 

January  17.  Tchehov  made  a  mistake  in  thinking  that 
if  he  had  had  more  time  he  would  have  written  more 
fully,  described  the  rain,  and  the  midwife  and  the 
doctor  having  tea.  The  truth  is  one  can  get  only  so 
much  into  a  story;  there  is  always  a  sacrifice.  One  has 
to  leave  out  what  one  knows  and  longs  to  use.  Why? 
I  haven't  any  idea,  but  there  it  is.  It's  always  a  kind 
of  race  to  get  in  as  much  as  one  can  before  it  disap- 
pears. 

But  time  is  not  really  in  it.  Yet  wait.  I  do  not  under- 
stand even  now.  I  am  pursued  by  time  myself.  The 
only  occasion  when  I  ever  felt  at  leisure  was  while 
writing  The  Daughters  of  the  Late  Colonel.  And  at 
the  end  I  was  so  terribly  unhappy  that  I  wrote  as  fast 
as  possible  for  fear  of  dying  before  the  story  was  sent. 
I  should  like  to  prove  this,  to  work  at  real  leisure. 
Only  thus  can  it  be  done. 

January  18.  H.  is  a  man  to  remember.  At  tea  that  day. 
Mrs.  M.  before  the  huge  silver  kettle  and  pots  and 
large  plates.  The  ornate  cake ;  one  must  remember  that 
cake.  "  It  seems  such  a  pity  to  cut  it,"  and  the  way  the 
old  hand,  so  calmly,  grasped  the  knife.  H.  leaning 
back,  slapping  two  pieces  of  bread  and  butter  together. 
"More  tea,  Jim?  "  "No,  thanks.  Yes.  Half  a  cup." 
Pouring  from  the  kettle  to  the  tea-cup,  the  fat  finger 

=  221  = 


Journal   IQ22 

on  the  knob.  "And  how  is  he?  "  "Bleeding  like  a 
pig !  "  "  Oh,  dear  "  —  gathering  her  lace  scarf  into  her 
lap  —  "  I'm  sorry  to  hear  that." 

H.  always  collects  something  —  always  will.  China, 
silver,  "  any  old  thing  that  comes  along."  He's  musical 
and  collects  fiddles.  His  feeling  for  his  children  is  so 
tender  that  it's  pain.  He  can't  understand  it. 

One  must  remember,  too,  his  extraordinary  inse- 
curity. The  world  rocks  under  him,  and  it's  only  when 
he  has  that  stethoscope  that  he  can  lay  down  the  law. 
Then  lay  it  down  he  does.  "  What  I  say  is :  she's  mad. 
She's  not  normal.  And  a  person  who  isn't  normal  I 
call  mad  —  barmy"  And  you  hear  pride  in  his  voice ; 
you  hear  the  unspoken :  "  I  am  a  plain  man,  you 
know. . . ." 

I'm  afraid  there  is  a  vein  of  tremendous  cynicism 
in  him,  too.  He  feels  somewhere  that  all  is  ashes.  He 
likes  to  go  to  church,  to  take  part,  to  sing  when  others 
sing,  to  kneel,  to  intone  the  responses.  This  puts  his 
heart  at  rest.  But  when  it  is  over  and  he  is  at  home  and 
there  is  a  smell  of  beef,  there  comes  this  restlessness. 
When  he  was  little,  I  imagine  he  pulled  the  wings  off 
flies.  And  I  still  see  suicide  as  his  end,  in  a  kind  of 
melancholia,  and  '  nobody  wants  me,'  and  '  damned 
if  I  won't.' 

January  20.  Wrote  to  de  la  Mare.  Why  it  should  be 
such  an  effort  to  write  to  the  people  one  loves  I  can- 
not imagine.  It's  none  at  all  to  write  to  those  who 
don't  really  count.  But  for  weeks  I  have  thought  of 

=  222  = 


Grandma 


D.,  wanted  to,  longed  to  write  to  him,  but  something 
held  back  my  pen.  What?  Once  started,  really  started, 
all  goes  easily.  ...  I  told  him  in  this  letter  how  much 
I  thought  of  him.  I  suppose  it  is  the  effect  of  isolation 
that  I  can  truly  say  I  think  of  de  la  Mare,  Tchehov, 
Koteliansky,  Tomlinson,  Lawrence,  Orage,  every  day. 
They  are  part  of  my  life.  . .  . 

I  have  got  more  or  less  used  to  pain  at  last.  I  wonder 
sometimes  if  this  is  worse  or  better  than  what  has 
been ;  but  I  don't  expect  to  be  without.  But  I  have  a 
suspicion  —  sometimes  a  certainty  —  that  the  real 
cause  of  my  illness  is  not  my  lungs  at  all,  but  some- 
thing else.  And  if  this  were  found  and  cured,  all  the 
rest  would  heal. 

January  21.  Grandma's  birthday.  Where  is  that  pho- 
tograph of  my  dear  love  leaning  against  her  husband's 
shoulder,  with  her  hair  parted  so  meekly  and  her  eyes 
raised?  I  love  it.  I  long  to  have  it.  For  one  thing 
Mother  gave  it  me  at  a  time  when  she  loved  me.  But 
for  another  —  so  much  more  important  —  it  is  she, 
my  own  Grandma,  young  and  lovely.  That  arm.  That 
baby  sleeve.  Even  the  velvet  ribbon.  I  must  see  them 
again. 

And  one  day  I  must  write  about  Grandma  at  length, 
especially  of  her  beauty  in  her  bath  —  when  she  was 
about  sixty.  Wiping  herself  with  the  towel.  I  remem- 
ber now  how  lovely  she  seemed  to  me.  And  her  fine 
linen,  her  throat,  her  scent.  I  have  never  really  de- 
scribed her  yet.  Patience !  The  time  will  come. 

=  223  = 


Journal   1922 

January  22.  My  feeling  about  Ernestine  is  shameful. 
But  there  it  is.  Her  tread,  her  look,  the  way  her  nose  is 
screwed  round,  her  intense  stupidity,  her  wrists  —  re- 
volt me.  This  is  bad.  For  she  feels  it,  I  am  sure  she 
does.  When  we  speak  together  she  blushes  in  a  way 
that  doesn't  seem  to  me  natural.  I  feel  that  her  self- 
respect  is  shamed  by  my  thoughts. 

Lumbago.  This  is  a  very  queer  thing.  So  sudden,  so 
painful.  I  must  remember  it  when  I  write  about  an  old 
man.  The  start  to  get  up  —  the  pause  —  the  look  of 
fury  —  and  how,  lying  at  night,  one  seems  to  get 
locked.  To  move  is  an  agony;  till  finally  one  discovers 
a  movement  which  is  possible.  But  that  helpless  feel- 
ing about  with  the  legs  first! 

January  23.  Paris?  To  remember  the  sound  of  wind 
—  the  peculiar  wretchedness  one  can  feel  while 
the  wind  blows.  Then  the  warm  soft  wind  of  spring 
searching  out  the  heart.  The  wind  I  call  the  Ancient 
of  Days  which  blows  here  at  night.  The  wind  that 
shakes  the  garden  at  night  when  one  runs  out  into  it. 
Dust.  Turning  one's  back  on  a  high,  heavy  wind. 
Walking  along  the  Esplanade  when  the  wind  carries 
the  sea  over.  The  wind  of  summer,  so  playful,  that 
rocked  and  swung  in  the  trees  here.  And  wind  moving 
through  grass  so  that  the  grass  quivers.  This  moves 
me  with  an  emotion  I  don't  ever  understand.  I  always 
see  a  field,  a  young  horse  —  and  there  is  a  very  fair 
Danish  girl  telling  me  something  about  her  step- 
father. The  girl's  name  is  Elsa  Bagge. 

=  224  = 


"Grandma" 


W ellington 


January  24.  Wrote  and  finished  Taking  the  Veil.  It 
took  me  about  3  hours  to  write  finally.  But  I  had  been 
thinking  over  the  decor  and  so  on  for  weeks  —  nay, 
months,  I  believe.  I  can't  say  how  thankful  I  am  to 
have  been  born  in  N.Z.,  to  know  Wellington  as  I  do, 
and  to  have  it  to  range  about  in.  Writing  about  the 
convent  seemed  so  natural.  I  suppose  I  have  not  been 
in  the  grounds  more  than  twice.  But  it  is  one  of  the 
places  that  remains  as  vivid  as  ever.  I  must  not  forget 
the  name  of  Miss  Sparrow,1  nor  the  name  Palmer. 

January  25.  Played  cribbage  with  J.  I  delight  in  see- 
ing him  win.  When  we  play  he  sometimes  makes  faces 
at  me  —  the  same  kind  of  faces  that  Chummie  used 
to  make.  I  think  I  am  never  so  fond  of  him  as  when 
he  does  this. 

We  were  talking  of  the  personality  of  the  cat  to-day 
and  saying  that  we  ought  to  write  it  down.  It  is  true 
he  has  become  as  real  as  if  he  could  talk.  I  feel  he  does 
talk,  and  that  when  he  is  silent  it  is  only  a  case  of 
making  his  nettle  shirt  and  he  will  begin.  Perhaps  the 
most  engaging  glimpse  of  him  is  playing  his  fiddle 
with  wool  for  strings  or  sitting  up  to  the  piano  and 
playing  Nelly  Bly.  But  his  love  Isbel,  his  whole  com- 
plete little  life  side  by  side  with  ours,  ought  to  be  told. 
I  shall  never  tell  it,  though. 

January  26.  Pinker  writes  to  say  The  Nation  has 
taken  "  The  Doll's  House." 

1  See  entry  of  October  18,  1920. 
=   225    = 


Journal  IQ22 


I  am  sure  that  meditation  is  the  cure  for  the  sick- 
ness of  my  mind,  i.e.  its  lack  of  control.  I  have  a  ter- 
ribly sensitive  mind  which  receives  every  impression, 
and  that  is  the  reason  why  I  am  so  carried  away  and 
borne  under. 

January  27.  M.  came,  wearing  her  woolly  lamb.  A 
strange  fate  overtakes  me  with  her.  We  seem  to  be 
always  talking  of  physical  subjects.  They  bore  and 
disgust  me,  for  I  feel  it  is  waste  of  time,  and  yet  we 
always  revert  to  them.  She  lay  back  on  the  pillows, 
talking.  She  had  an  absent  air.  She  was  saying  how 
fine  women  were  .  .  .  and  it  was  on  the  tip  of  my 
tongue  to  be  indiscreet.  But  I  was  not.  Thank 
Heaven ! 

I  have  been  in  pain,  in  bad  pain  all  day.  I  ache  all 
over.  I  can  hardly  stand.  It  seems  impossible  that  I 
am  going  away  on  Monday. 

January  28.  These  preparations  for  flight  are  almost 
incredible.  The  only  way  to  keep  calm  is  to  play  crib. 
J.  and  I  sit  opposite  each  other.  I  feel  we  are  awfully 
united.  And  we  play  and  laugh  and  it  seems  to  keep  us 
together.  While  the  game  lasts,  we  are  there.  A  queer 
feeling.  . .  . 

January  29.  H.  came.  He  says  my  right  lung  is  prac- 
tically all  right.  Can  one  believe  such  words?  The 
other  is  a  great  deal  better.  He  thinks  my  heart  will 

=  226  = 


A  Perfect  Day 


give  me  far  less  trouble  at  a  lower  level.  Can  this  be 
true?  He  was  so  hopeful  to-day  that  T.B.  seemed  no 
longer  a  scourge.  It  seemed  that  one  recovered  more 
often  than  not.  Is  this  fantastic? 

Tidied  all  my  papers.  Tore  up  and  ruthlessly  de- 
stroyed much.  This  is  always  a  great  satisfaction. 
Whenever  I  prepare  for  a  journey  I  prepare  as  though 
for  death.  Should  I  never  return,  all  is  in  order.  This 
is  what  life  has  taught  me. 

In  the  evening  I  wrote  to  O.  about  his  book.  It  has 
taken  me  a  week  to  write  the  letter.  J.  and  I  seem  to 
have  played  cribbage  off  and  on  all  day.  I  feel  there  is 
much  love  between  us.  Tender  love.  Let  it  not  change1. 

January  30.  There  was  a  tremendous  fall  of  snow  on 
Sunday.  Monday  was  the  first  real  perfect  day  of 
winter.  It  seemed  that  the  happiness  of  J.  and  of  me 
reached  its  zenith  on  that  day.  We  could  not  have  been 
happier ;  that  was  the  feeling.  Sitting  one  moment  on 
the  balcony  of  the  bed-room,  for  instance,  or  driving 
in  the  sleigh  through  masses  of  heaped-up  snow.  He 
looked  so  beautiful,  too — hatless,  strolling  about 
with  his  hands  in  his  pockets.  He  weighed  himself.  10 
stone.  There  was  a  harmonium  in  the  waiting-room. 
Then  I  went  away,  after  a  quick  but  not  hurried 
kiss. .  .  . 

It  was  very  beautiful  on  the  way  to  Sierre.  Then  I 
kept  wondering  if  I  was  seeing  it  all  for  the  last  time 
—  the  snowy  bushes,  the  leafless  trees.  "  I  miss  the 
buns." 

=  227  - 


Journal   IQ22 

January  31.  Travelling  is  terrible.  All  is  so  sordid,  and 
the  train  shatters  one.  Tunnels  are  hell.  I  am  fright- 
ened of  travelling. 

We  arrived  in  Paris  late,  but  it  was  very  beautiful 
—  all  emerging  from  water.  In  the  night  I  looked  out 
and  saw  the  men  with  lanterns.  The  hotel  all  sordid 
again,  —  fruit  peelings,  wastepaper,  boots,  grime,  ill- 
temper.  In  the  evening  I  saw  Manoukhin.  But  on  the 
way  there,  nay,  even  before,  I  realized  my  heart  was 
not  in  it.  I  feel  divided  in  myself  and  angry  and  with- 
out virtue.  Then  L.M.  and  I  had  one  of  our  famous 
quarrels,  and  I  went  to  the  wrong  house.  Don't  forget, 
as  I  rang  the  bell,  the  scampering  and  laughter  inside. 
M.  had  a  lame  girl  there  as  interpreter.  He  said 
through  her  he  could  cure  me  completely.  But  I  did 
not  believe  it.  It  all  seemed  suddenly  unimportant  and 
ugly.  But  the  flat  was  nice  —  the  red  curtains,  marble 
clock,  and  picture  of  ladies  with  powdered  hair. 

February  1.  At  5.30  I  went  to  the  clinique  and  saw  the 
other  man,  D.  I  asked  him  to  explain  the  treatment 
and  so  on.  He  did  so.  But  first:  as  I  approached  the 
door  it  opened  and  the  hall,  very  light,  showed,  with 
the  maid  smiling,  wearing  a  little  shawl,  holding  back 
the  door.  Through  the  hall  a  man  slipped  quickly 
carrying  what  I  thought  was  a  cross  of  green  leaves. 
Suddenly  the  arms  of  the  little  cross  waved  feebly,  and 
I  saw  it  was  a  small  child  strapped  to  a  wooden  tray. 
While  I  waited,  voices  came  from  another  room  — 
very  loud  voices,  M.'s  over  and  above  them :  Da!  Da! 

=  228  = 


The   Clinic 


and  then  an  interrogatory :  Da?  I  have  the  feeling  that 
M.  is  a  really  good  man.  I  have  also  a  sneaking  feeling 
(I  use  that  word  '  sneaking '  advisedly)  that  he  is  a 
kind  of  unscrupulous  impostor.  Another  proof  of  my 
divided  nature.  All  is  disunited.  Half  boos,  half  cheers. 
Yes,  that's  it.  To  do  anything,  to  be  anything,  one 
must  gather  oneself  together  and  *  one's  faith  make 
stronger.'  Nothing  of  any  worth  can  come  from  a  dis- 
united being.  It's  only  by  accident  that  I  write  any- 
thing worth  a  rush,  and  then  it's  only  skimming  the 
top  —  no  more.  But  remember  The  Daughters  \_of  the 
Late  Colonel]  was  written  at  Mentone  in  November 
when  I  was  not  so  bad  as  usual.  I  was  trying  with  all 
my  soul  to  be  good.  Here  I  try  and  fail,  and  the  fact 
of  consciousness  makes  each  separate  failure  very 
important  —  each  a  sin.  If,  combined  with  M.'s  treat- 
ment, I  treated  myself  —  worked  out  of  this  slough 
of  despond  —  lived  an  honourable  life  —  and,  above 
all,  made  straight  my  relations  with  L.M.  ...  I  am  a 
sham.  I  am  also  an  egoist  of  the  deepest  dye  —  such 
a  one  that  it  was  very  difficult  to  confess  to  it  in  case 
this  book  should  be  found.  Even  my  being  well  is  a 
kind  of  occasion  for  vanity.  There  is  nothing  worse 
for  the  soul  than  egoism.  Therefore  .  .  . 

February  3.  I  went  to  M.  for  a  treatment.  A  curious 
impression  remains.  M.'s  beautiful  gesture  coming 
into  the  room  was  perfect.  But  D.  shouted  so,  pushed 
his  face  into  mine,  asked  me  indecent  questions.  Ah, 
that's  the  horror  of  being  ill.  One  must  submit  to  hav- 

=  229  = 


Journal   IQ22 


ing  one's  secrets  held  up  to  the  light,  and  regarded  with 
a  cold  stare.  D.  is  a  proper  Frenchman.  "Etes-vous 
constipee?  "  Shall  I  ever  forget  that,  and  the  wadding 
of  his  tie  showing  over  his  white  coat?  M.  sits  apart, 
smoking,  and  his  head  —  which  is  a  curious  shape: 
one  is  conscious  of  it  all  the  time  as  of  an  instrument 

—  hangs  forward.  But  he  is  deeply  different.  He  de- 
sires to  reassure.  "  Pas  de  cavernes." 

Had  palpitation  from  the  moment  of  getting  on  to 
the  table  till  5  o'clock.  But  when  I  felt  this  coming  on 
while  rays  were  working,  I  felt  simply  horribly  callous. 
I  thought :  Well,  if  this  kills  me  —  let  it !  Voila !  That 
shows  how  bad  I  am. 

February  4.  Massingham  accepts  the  idea  of  a  regular 

story.  Heard  from  K about  *  people.'  It  was  rather 

a  horrible  day.  I  was  ill,  and  at  night  I  had  one  of  my 
terrible  fits  of  temper  over  a  parcel.  Is  it  possible  one 
can  be  so  unruly? 

Heard  from  J.  saying  he  will  stay  in  Montana. 
There  breathes  in  his  letter  the  relief  from  strain.  It 
is  remarkable.  He  does  not  believe  a  word  about  M. 
and  talks  of  coming  to  *  fetch '  me  in  May.  Well,  if 
I  am  any  better,  there  will  never  be  any  more  fetching. 
Of  that  I  am  determined.  The  letter  kept  me  awake 
until  very  late.  And  my  sciatica !  Put  it  on  record,  in 
case  it  ever  goes,  what  a  pain  it  is.  Remember  to  give 
it  to  someone  in  a  story  one  day.  L.M.  is  a  very  tragic 
figure.  Remember  her  eyes  —  the  pupils  dark  —  black 

—  and  her  whiteness.  Even  her  hair  seems  to  grow 

=  230  = 


Letters 

pale.  She  folded  the  quilt  and  held  it  in  her  arms  as 
though  it  was  a  baby. 

February  5.  Wrote  at  my  story,  read  Shakespeare. 
Read  Goethe,  thought,  prayed. 

The  day  was  cold  and  fine.  But  I  felt  ill  and  could 
do  nothing  but  lie  still  all  day.  This  going  to  Paris  has 
been  so  much  more  important  than  it  seemed.  Now  I 
begin  to  see  it  as  the  result,  the  ending  of  all  that  read- 
ing. I  mean  that  even  Cosmic  Anatomy  is  involved. 
Something  has  been  built,  a  raft,  frail  and  not  very 
seaworthy ;  but  it  will  serve.  Before,  I  was  cast  into  the 
water  when  I  was  '  alone '  —  I  mean  during  my  illness 
—  and  now  something  supports  me.  But  much  is  to 
be  done.  Much  discipline  and  meditation  is  needed. 
Above  all,  it  is  important  to  get  work  done.  Heard 
from  Pinker  that  Cassells  have  taken  "  A  Cup  of 
Tea." 

Thought  about  French  women  and  their  impudent 
confidence  in  the  power  of  sex. 

February  6.  Letters  from  B.  and  J.  B's  letter  was  the 
most  beautiful  I  have  ever  received.  It  gave  me  a 
strange  shock  to  find  J.  never  even  asked  how  things 
were  going.  A  boyish  letter  like  so  many  I  have  had, 
but  absolutely  impersonal.  It  might  have  been  written 
to  anyone.  True,  he  was  anxious  for  the  post.  But  .  .  . 
that  was  because  he  is  alone.  Do  I  make  J.  up?  Is  he 
thankful  to  sink  into  himself  again?  I  feel  relief  in 
every  line.  There's  no  strain  —  nothing  that  binds 

=  231  = 


Journal   1922 

him.  Then  let  it  continue  so.  But  I  will  not  take  a 
house  anywhere.  I,  too,  will  be  free.  (I  write  exactly 
as  I  feel.)  I  do  not  want  to  see  J.  again  just  now.  I 
shall  beg  him  not  to  come  here.  He  is  at  present  just 
like  a  fish  that  has  escaped  from  the  hook. 

A  bad  day.  I  feel  ill,  in  an  obscure  way  —  horrible 
pains  and  so  on,  and  weakness.  I  could  do  nothing. 
The  weakness  was  not  only  physical.  I  must  heal  my 
Self  before  I  will  be  well. 

Yes,  that  is  the  important  thing.  No  attention  is 
needed  here.  This  must  be  done  alone  and  at  once.  It 
is  at  the  root  of  my  not  getting  better.  My  mind  is  not 
controlled.  I  idle,  I  give  way,  I  sink  into  despair. 

February  9.  A  miserable  day.  In  the  night  I  thought 
for  hours  of  the  evils  of  uprooting.  Every  time  one 
leaves  anywhere,  something  precious,  which  ought  not 
to  be  killed,  is  left  to  die. 

February  10. 1  did  not  go  to  the  clinique  because  of  my 
chill.  Spent  the  day  in  bed,  reading  the  papers.  The 
feeling  that  someone  was  coming  towards  me  is  too 
strong  for  me  to  work.  It  was  like  sitting  on  a  bench 
at  the  end  of  a  long  avenue  in  a  park  and  seeing  some- 
one far  in  the  distance  coming  your  way.  She  tries  to 
read.  The  book  is  in  her  hand,  but  it's  all  nonsense, 
and  might  as  well  be  upside  down.  She  reads  the 
advertisements  as  though  they  were  part  of  the  ar- 
ticles. 

I  must  not  forget  the  long  talk  L.M.  and  I  had  the 

=  232  = 


H ate 


other  evening  about  hate.  What  is  hate  ?  Who  has  ever 
described  it?  Why  do  I  feel  it  for  her?  She  says:  "  It 
is  because  I  am  nothing,  I  have  suppressed  all  my 
desires  to  such  an  extent  that  now  I  have  none. 
I  don't  think.  I  don't  feel."  I  reply :  "  If  you  were 
cherished  and  loved  for  a  week,  you  would  recover." 
And  that  is  true,  and  I  would  like  to  do  it.  It  seems 
I  ought  to  do  it.  But  I  don't.  The  marvel  is  that 
she  understands.  No  one  else  on  earth  could  under- 
stand. 

All  that  week  she  had  her  little  corner.  "  I  may  come 
into  my  little  corner  to-night?  "  she  asks  timidly,  and 
I  reply  —  so  cold,  so  cynical  —  "  If  you  want  to."  But 
what  would  I  do  if  she  didn't  come? 

J.  arrived  early  in  the  morning.  In  half  an  hour  it 
seemed  he  had  been  here  a  long  time.  I  still  regret  his 
coming  here  for  his  sake.  I  know  it  is  right  for  our 
sake.  We  went  together  to  the  clinique.  Bare  leafless 
trees.  A  wonderful  glow  in  the  sky:  the  windows 

flashed  fire.  M drew  a  picture  of  my  heart.  I  wish 

he  had  not.  I  am  haunted  by  the  hideous  picture,  by 
the  thought  of  my  heart  like  a  heavy  drop  in  my  breast. 
But  he  is  good. 

February  12.  We  put  the  chess-men  on  the  board  and 
began  to  play.  It  was  an  unsettled  day.  L.M.  in  and 
out  with  no  home,  —  no  place  —  whirled  like  a  leaf 
along  this  dark  passage  and  then  out  into  the  raw 
street. 

J.  read  the  Tchehov  aloud.  I  had  read  one  of  the 

=  233  = 


Journal  IQ22 


stories  myself  and  it  seemed  to  me  nothing.  But  read 
aloud,  it  was  a  masterpiece.  How  was  that? 

I  want  to  remember  the  evening  before.  I  was 
asleep.  He  came  in  —  thrust  his  head  in  at  the  door 
and  as  I  woke,  I  did  not  know  him.  I  saw  a  face  which 
reminded  me  of  his  mother  and  Richard.  But  I  felt  a 
kind  of  immediate  dread  confusion.  I  knew  I  ought  to 
know  it  and  that  it  belonged  to  him,  yet  he  was  as  it 
were  not  present.  I  think  this  is  what  people  who  are 
going  out  of  their  minds  must  feel  about  the  faces  that 
bend  over  them  and  old,  old  people  about  the  children. 
And  that  accounts  for  the  foolish  offended  look  in 
their  faces  sometimes.  They  feel  it's  not  right  they 
should  not  know. 

February  13.  Felt  ill  all  day.  Feeling  of  violent  con- 
fusion in  my  body  and  head.  I  feel  more  ill  now  than 
ever,  so  it  seems. 

J.  went  out  and  bought  a  tea-pot  and  so  on; 
arranged  a  game  of  chess  and  we  started  playing.  But 
the  pains  in  my  back  and  so  on  make  my  prison  almost 
unendurable.  I  manage  to  get  up,  to  dress,  to  make  a 
show  of  getting  to  the  restaurant  and  back  without 
being  discovered.  But  that  is  literally  all.  The  rest  is 
rather  like  being  a  beetle  shut  in  a  book,  so  shackled 
that  one  can  do  nothing  but  lie  down.  And  even  to  lie 
down  becomes  a  kind  of  agony.  The  worst  of  it  is  I 
have  again  lost  hope.  I  don't,  I  can't  believe  this  will 
change.  I  have  got  off  the  ship  again  and  am  swept 
here  and  there  by  the  sea. 

-  234  - 


Discouragement 


February  14.  Another  hellish  day.  But  J.  found  some 
pastilles  which  help  my  throat,  and  it  seemed  to  me 
they  had  a  calming  effect  on  my  heart. 

I  had  one  of  my  perfect  dreams.  I  was  at  sea,  sailing 
with  my  parasol  opened  to  just  a  '  freshet '  of  wind. 
Heavenly  the  sea,  the  sky,  the  land  —  parasol  pink  — 
boat  pale  pink. 

If  I  could  only  get  over  my  discouragement!  But 
who  is  going  to  help  with  that!  Now  that  L.M.  is 
going  I  have  more  to  do  —  all  my  clothes  and  so  on 
to  put  away  and  pull  out,  as  well  as  a  bowl  or  two 
to  wash.  The  effort  uses  what  remains  of  my  strength. 
By  5  o'clock  I  am  finished  and  must  go  to  bed 
again. 

It  is  a  very  dull  day.  The  canaries  sing.  I  have  been 
reading  Bunin's  stories.  He  is  not  a  sympathetic  soul, 
but  it  is  good  to  read  him  ...  he  carries  one  away. 

February  17.  Went  to  the  clinique.  I  felt  that  all  was 
wrong  there.  M.  was  distrait  and  a  little  angry.  D. 
as  usual  sailed  over  everything.  But  that  means  noth- 
ing. It  seemed  to  me  there  had  been  some  trouble  or 
some  trouble  was  brewing. 

The  servant  there  is  a  very  beautiful  plump  woman 
with  a  ravishing  smile.  Her  eyes  are  grey.  She  curls  her 
hair  in  a  small  fringe  and  she  wears  a  little  grey  shawl, 
an  apron,  and  a  pair  of  rather  high  boots;  stepping 
lightly,  with  one  small  plump  hand  holding  the  shawl, 
she  opens  the  door. 

=  235  = 


Journal   IQ22 


February 

[The  following  is  a  list  of  stories,  arranged  apparently  for  in- 
clusion in  a  volume.  Those  in  the  second  column  were  already 
written;  those  in  the  first  column  to  be  written.  Of  these  only 
The  Fly  was  actually  written.  Some  fragments  of  the  others  are 
printed  in  "  The  Doves'  Nest."] 


The  Major  and  the  Lady 

[Widowed?] 
The  Mother. 
The  Fly. 

An  Unhappy  Man. 
Lucien. 

Down  the  Sounds. 
A  Visit. 
Sisters. 

The  New  Baby. 
Confidences. 
The  Dreamers. 
Aunt  Fan. 
Honesty. 
Best  Girl. 


A  Cup  of  Tea 

[January  11,  1922]. 
Taking  the  Veil 

[January  24,  1922]. 
The  Doll's  House 

[October  24-30,  1921]. 


February  20.  Finished  The  Fly. 

May  1.  Oh,  what  will  this  beloved  month  bring? 


May  3.  Paris.  I  must  begin  writing  for  Clement 
Shorter  to-day  12  "  spasms  "  of  2,000  words  each.  I 
thought  of  the  Burnells,  but  no,  I  don't  think  so. 
Much  better,  the  Sheridans,  the  three  girls  and  the 
brother  and  the  Father  and  Mother  and  so  on,  ending 

=  236  = 


A  New  Story 

with  a  long  description  of  Meg's  wedding  to  Keith 
Fenwick.  Well,  there's  the  first  flown  out  of  the  nest. 
The  sisters  Bead,  who  come  to  stay.  The  white  sheet 
on  the  floor  when  the  wedding  dress  is  tried  on.  Yes, 
I've  got  the  details  all  right.  But  the  point  is  —  Where 
shall  I  begin?  One  certainly  wants  to  dash. 

Meg  was  playing.  I  don't  think  I  ought  to  begin 
with  that.  It  seems  to  me  the  mother's  coming  home 
ought  to  be  the  first  chapter.  The  other  can  come  later. 
And  in  that  playing  chapter  what  I  want  to  stress 
chiefly  is :  Which  is  the  real  life  —  that  or  this  ?  —  late 
afternoon,  these  thoughts  —  the  garden —  the  beauty 
—  how  all  things  pass  —  and  how  the  end  seems  to 
come  so  soon. 

And  then  again  there  is  the  darling  bird  —  I've 
always  loved  birds  —  Where  is  the  little  chap?  .  .  . 

What  is  it  that  stirs  one  so  ?  What  is  this  seeking  — 
so  joyful  —  ah,  so  gentle!  And  there  seems  to  be  a 
moment  when  all  is  to  be  discovered.  Yes,  that's  the 
feeling.  .  .  . 

The  queer  thing  is  I  only  remember  how  much  I 
have  forgotten  when  I  hear  that  piano.  The  garden 
of  the  Casino,  the  blue  pansies.  But  oh,  how  am  I 
going  to  write  this  story  ? 

[There  follows  the  opening  paragraph  of  the  story.] 

"  The  late  afternoon  was  beautiful  in  Port  Willin. 
There  was  a  moment  when  the  whole  small  town 
seemed  to  quiver  in  those  last  bright  rays.  Gold  shone 
the  harbour,  the  windows  of  the  big  hospital  on  Clifton 

=  237  - 


Journal   IQ22 

Hill  flashed  fiery.  Only  the  pigeons  flying  so  high  above 
Post  Office  Square  and  the  plumes  of  smoke  rising 
from  the  evening  fires  were  silver." 

[An  unposted  letter.] 
May.  Just  a  line  to  say  —  J.  and  I  both  have  so  much 
work  to  do  this  summer  that  we  have  decided  when  we 
leave  here  (end  of  this  month)  to  go  to  the  Hotel 
d'Angleterre,  Randogne.  Does  that  make  you  open 
your  eyes?  But  in  the  summer,  June  and  July,  that 
place  was  so  lovely  and  I  know  it.  It  would  only  take 
a  day  to  settle  and  a  look  at  the  mountains,  before  we 
could  work.  All  other  arrangements  are  too  difficult 
—  Germany  and  so  on.  We  have  not,  literally,  the 
time  to  discover  a  new  place  and  take  our  bearings. 
Then  we  shall  be  near  Elizabeth,  too.  The  winter  we 
are  going  to  spend  in  Bandol  at  the  Beau  Rivage.  I 
am  going  to  get  a  maid  now  at  once.  I  can't  do  without 
one.  I  simply  have  not  the  time  to  attend  to  everything 
and  I  can't  bear,  as  you  know, '  untidiness.'  .  .  .  Don't 
speak  of  our  plans,  by  chance,  will  you? 

There  is  a  really  superb  professional  pianist  here. 
He  plays  nearly  all  day  and  writes  his  own  music. 
Au  revoir.  K.M. 

[In  May  K.M.  left  Paris  to  spend  the  summer  in  Switzerland, 
her  plan  then  being  to  return  to  Paris  in  October  for  a  second 
course  of  the  same  treatment,  which  had  been  (or  seemed  to  the 
outside  observer  to  have  been)  successful.  When  she  returned 
to  Switzerland  and  was  examined  by  her  previous  doctor,  he  was 
astonished  at  her  progress. 

=  238  - 


Rando  gne 

But  K.M.  never  believed  that  she  would  die  of  consumption, 
but  always  of  heart-failure,  and  she  thought  that  her  heart  had 
grown  worse  under  the  treatment.  And,  deeper  than  this,  she 
had  come  to  the  conviction  that  her  bodily  health  depended 
upon  her  spiritual  condition.  Her  mind  was  henceforward  pre- 
occupied with  discovering  some  way  to  '  cure  her  soul ';  and  she 
eventually  resolved,  to  my  great  regret,  to  abandon  her  treat- 
ment, and  to  live  as  though  her  grave  physical  illness  were  in- 
cidental, and  even,  so  far  as  she  could,  as  though  it  were 
non-existent.] 

June.  Randogne,  Switzerland.  I  find  the  rapture  at 
being  alone  hard  to  understand.  Certainly  when  I 
am  sitting  out  of  sight  under  a  tree  I  feel  I  could  be 
content  never  to  return.  As  to  *  fear,'  it  is  gone.  It  is 
replaced  by  a  kind  of  callousness.  What  will  be,  will 
be.  But  this  is  not  a  very  useful  statement,  for  I've 
never  put  it  to  the  test. 

Should  I  be  as  happy  with  anyone  at  my  side?  No. 
I'd  begin  to  talk,  and  it's  far  nicer  not  to  talk.  Or,  if 
it  were  J.  he'd  open  a  little  blue  book  by  Diderot, 
Jacques  le  Fataliste,  and  begin  to  read  it,  and  that 
would  make  me  wretched.  .  .  .  Why  the  devil  want  to 
read  stuffy,  snuffy  Diderot  when  there  is  this  other 
book  before  one's  eyes?  I  do  not  want  to  be  a  book 
worm.  If  its  book  is  taken  away  from  it,  the  little  blind 
head  is  raised;  it  wags,  hovers,  terribly  uneasy,  in  a 
void  —  until  it  begins  to  burrow  again. 

Loneliness :  *  Oh  Loneliness,  of  my  sad  heart  be 
Queen ! '  It  isn't  in  the  least  that.  My  heart  is  not  sad 
except  when  I  am  among  people,  and  then  I  am  far  too 

=  239  = 


Journal   IQ22 

distracted  to  think  about  Queens.  (Oh,  dear!  Here  is 
a  walking  tragedy  —  Madame  with  a  whole  tray  of 
food!  And  I  begged  for  a  bastick,  only  a  bastick!) 

[The  following  description  is  of  a  family  who  lived  in  a  small 
chalet  within  view  of  K.M.'s  window  at  Randogne.] 

I  have  watched  this  big  heavy  woman,  moving  so 
sullen,  plodding  in  and  out  with  her  pails  and  brushes, 
coming  to  the  door  at  midday  and  evening  to  look  for 
her  husband  and  child.  She  looks  neither  sad  nor 
happy;  she  looks  resigned  and  stupefied.  Sometimes, 
when  she  stops  and  stares  round  her,  she  is  like  a  cow 
that  is  being  driven  along  a  road,  and  sometimes  when, 
leaning  out  the  window,  she  watches  her  quick  hus- 
band, so  jauntily  cutting  up  logs  of  wood,  I  think  she 
hates  him  —  and  the  sight  of  her  suffocates  him. 

But  to-day,  it  being  the  first  fine  day  since  the  lodg- 
ers have  come,  they  went  off  for  a  walk  and  left  the 
nurse-girl  in  charge  of  the  baby.  A  *  cradle '  made  of 
two  straw  baskets  on  trestles  was  brought  out  into  the 
sun  and  the  baby  heaped  up  in  it.  Then  the  nurse  girl 
disappeared. 

Round  the  side  of  the  house  came  my  woman.  She 
stopped.  She  looked  round  quickly.  She  leaned  over 
the  cradle  and  held  out  her  finger  to  the  baby.  Then  it 
seemed  she  was  simply  overcome  with  the  loveliness 
and  the  wonder  of  this  little  thing.  She  tip-toed  round 
the  cradle,  bent  over,  shook  her  head,  shook  her 
finger  —  pulled  up  a  tiny  sleeve,  looked  at  a  dimpled 
arm.  Her  little  girl,  in  a  white  hat  (in  honour  of  the 

=  240  = 


The  Family 


lodgers)  danced  up.  I  imagine  my  woman  asked  her 
how  she  would  like  a  little  brother.  And  the  little  girl 
was  fascinated,  as  small  children  are  by  smaller. 

"  Kiss  his  hand,"  said  my  woman.  She  watched  her 
daughter,  very  serious,  kiss  the  tiny  hand;  and  she 
could  hardly  bear  that  anyone  should  touch  the  infant 
but  herself.  She  snatched  her  daughter  away.  .  . . 

When  finally  she  dragged  herself  away,  she  was 
trembling.  She  went  up  the  steps  into  the  house,  stood 
in  the  middle  of  the  kitchen,  and  it  seemed  that  the 
child  within  realized  her  love  and  moved.  A  faint, 
timid  smile  was  on  her  lips.  She  believed  and  she  did 
not  believe. 

Gyp,  their  dog,  is  the  most  servile  creature  imagina- 
ble. He  is  a  fat  brown  and  white  spaniel  with  a  fat 
round  end  of  tail  which  wags  for  everybody  at  every 
moment.  His  passion  is  for  the  baby.  If  anyone  throws 
him  sticks  he  dashes  off  and  brings  them  back  to  lay 
at  the  foot  of  the  cradle.  When  his  mistress  carries  the 
baby,  he  dances  round  them  so  madly,  in  such  a  frenzy 
of  delight,  that  one  doesn't  believe  in  him.  He  feels 
himself  one  of  the  family  —  a  family  dog. 

The  master  is  a  very  stupid  conceited  fellow  with 
a  large  thin  nose,  a  tuft  of  hair,  and  long  thin  legs.  He 
walks  slowly,  holding  himself  perfectly  rigid.  He  keeps 
his  hands  in  his  pockets  always.  Yesterday  he  wore  all 
day  a  pair  of  pale  blue  woollen  slippers  with  tassels. 
And  it  was  obvious  he  admired  himself  in  these  slip- 
pers tremendously.  To-day  he  is  walking  about  in  his 
shirt-sleeves,  wearing  a  sky-blue  shirt.  He  wears  black 


=  241  = 


Journal   1922 

velvet  trousers  and  a  short  coat.  I  am  sure  he  thinks  he 
is  perfectly  dressed  for  the  country.  Ah,  if  he  only  had 
a  gun  to  carry  on  his  shoulder ! 

When  he  came  home,  he  walked  stiff,  rigid  like  a 
post,  hands  in  pockets  up  to  the  front  door  and  stood 
there.  Did  not  knock,  gave  no  sign.  In  less  than  a  min- 
ute the  door  opened  to  him.  His  wife  felt  he  was  there. 

(What  a  passion  one  feels  for  the  sun  here!) 

The  friend  is  a  dashing  young  man  in  a  grey  suit, 
with  a  cap  always  worn  very  much  on  one  side.  His  cap 
he  does  not  like  to  take  off.  He  is  the  kind  of  man  who 
sits  on  the  edge  of  tables  or  leans  against  the  counter 
of  bars  with  his  thumbs  in  his  waistcoat.  He  feels  a 
dog.  He  is  sure  all  the  girls  are  wild  about  him,  and  it's 
true  each  time  he  looks  at  one,  she  is  ready  to  titter. 
For  all  his  carelessness,  he's  close  with  money.  When 
he  and  his  '  friend  '  go  up  to  the  village  for  stores,  he 
lounges  in  the  shop,  smells  things,  suggests  things,  but 
turns  his  back  and  whistles  when  it  comes  to  adding 
up  the  bill.  He  thinks  the  friend's  wife  is  in  love  with 
him. 

(When  the  dog  is  tied  up,  it  cries  pitifully,  sobs.  The 
sound,  so  unrestrained,  pleases  them.) 

The  wife  is  small,  untidy,  with  large  gold  rings  in 
her  hair.  She  wears  white  canvas  shoes  and  a  jacket 
trimmed  with  artificial  fur.  She  is  the  woman  who  is 
spending  the  day  at  the  sea-side.  She  looks  dissatisfied, 
unhappy.  I  am  sure  she  is  a  terrible  muddler. 

(The  dog  is  really  very  hysterical.) 

They  have  a  little  servant  maid  of  about  sixteen, 

=  242  = 


The  Servant  Maid 


with  a  loose  plait  of  dark  streaky  hair  and  silver- 
rimmed  spectacles.  She  walks  in  a  terribly  meek  but 
self-satisfied  way,  pushing  out  her  stomach.  She  is 
meekness  itself.  How  she  bows  her  head  and  walks 
after  her  master !  It  is  terrible  to  see.  She  wishes  to  be 
invisible,  to  pass  unseen.  "  Don't  look  at  me!  "  And 
she  effaces  herself.  (This  must  be  written  very  di- 
rectly.) She  it  is  who  holds  the  baby.  When  the  others 
have  gone,  she  rather  lords  it  over  the  baby,  turns  up 
his  clothes  and  exclaims  with  quite  an  air. 

The  baby  is  at  that  age  when  it  droops  over  a  shoul- 
der. It  is  still  a  boneless  baby,  blowing  bubbles,  in  a 
little  blue  muslin  frock.  When  it  cries,  it  cries  as 
though  it  were  being  squeezed.  Its  feet,  in  white  boots, 
are  like  little  cakes  of  dough. 

(The  dog's  enthusiasm  is  enough  to  make  you  want 
to  kick  it.  When  they  come  out,  cold,  damp,  depressed, 
there  he  is  leaping,  asking  when  the  fun's  going  to  be- 
gin. It  is  sickening.) 

A  queer  bit  of  psychology:  I  had  to  disappear  be- 
hind the  bushes  to-day  in  a  hollow.  That  act  made  me 
feel  nearer  to  normal  health  than  I  have  felt  for  years. 
Nobody  there;  nobody  wondered  if  I  was  all  right, 
i.e.  there  was  nothing  to  distinguish  me,  at  that  mo- 
ment, from  an  ordinary  human  being. 

Each  little  movement  of  this  bird  is  made  so  osten- 
tatiously—  as  if  it  were  trying  to  show  itself  off  as 
much  as  possible.  Why? 

But  to  continue  with  this  alone-ness  —  to  gather  it 

=  243  - 


Journal  IQ22 


up  a  little?  Could  I.  .  .  ?  It  seems  to  me  to  depend  en- 
tirely on  health  in  my  case.  If  I  were  well  and  could 
spend  the  evenings  sitting  up  writing  till  about 
eleven.  .  .  . 

To  look  up  through  the  trees  to  the  far-away  heav- 
enly blue. 

Now  it's  getting  late  afternoon  and  all  sounds  are 
softer,  deeper.  The  sough  of  the  wind  in  the  branches 
is  more  thoughtful. 

This  —  this  is  as  great  happiness  as  I  shall  ever 
know.  It  is  greater  happiness  than  I  had  ever  thought 

possible.  But  why  is  it  incompatible  with only 

because  of  your  weakness.  There  is  nothing  to  prevent 
you  being  like  this.  In  fact,  don't  you  yet  know  that 
the  more  active  and  apart  you  make  your  own  life,  the 
more  content  the  other  is  ?  What  he  finds  intolerable 
is  the  lack  of  privacy.  But  so  do  you.  It  makes  him  feel 
as  though  he  were  living  under  a  vacuum  jar.  So  it 
does  you.  You  hang  on  thinking  to  please  him  until 
he  longs  for  you  to  be  gone. 

How  badly,  how  stupidly  you  manage  your  life! 
Don't  you  realize  that  both  of  you  have  had  enough 
contact  to  last  for  years,  that  the  only  way  for  each 
of  you  to  be  renewed  and  refreshed  is  for  you  to  go 
apart.  Not  necessarily  to  tear  apart,  but  to  go  apart  as 
wisely  as  possible.  You  are  the  most  stupid  woman  I 
have  ever  met.  You  never  will  see  that  it  all  rests  with 
you.  If  you  do  not  take  the  initiative,  nothing  will  be 
done.  The  reason  why  you  find  it  so  hard  to  write  is 
because  you  are  learning  nothing.  I  mean  of  the  things 

=  244  = 


Sierre 

that  count  —  like  the  sight  of  this  tree  with  its  purple 
cones  against  the  blue.  How  can  I  put  it,  that  there  is 
gum  on  the  cones?  "  Gemmed?  "  No.  "  Beaded?  "  No. 
"  They  are  like  crystals."  Must  I?  I  am  afraid  so.  .  .  . 

[Towards  the  end  of  July  K.M.,  finding  the  height  of  Ran- 
dogne  too  great  a  strain  on  her  heart,  descended  to  Sierre.] 

July.  Sierre.  This  is  a  damning  little  note-book,  quite 
in  the  old  style.  How  I  am  committed ! 

To-day  is  Tuesday.  Since  leaving  Montana  I  have 
written  about  a  page.  The  rest  of  the  time  I  seem  to 
have  slept !  This,  of  course,  started  all  the  Old  Fears : 
that  I  should  never  write  again,  that  I  was  getting 
sleeping  sickness  and  so  on.  But  this  morning  I  nearly 
kicked  off,  and  this  evening  I  feel  perhaps  a  time  of 
convalescence  was  absolutely  necessary.  The  mind 
was  choked  with  the  wrack  of  all  those  dreadful  tides. 

I  wrote  to  K to-day.  It  seems  to  bring  things 

nearer. 

It's  only  now  I  am  beginning  to  see  again  and  to 
recognise  again  the  beauty  of  the  world.  Take  the 
swallows  to-day,  their  flutter-flutter,  their  velvet- 
forked  tails,  their  transparent  wings  that  are  like  the 
fins  of  fishes.  The  little  dark  head  and  breast  golden  in 
the  light.  Then  the  beauty  of  the  garden,  and  the 
beauty  of  raked  paths.  .  .  .  Then,  the  silence. 

I  wage  eternally  a  war  of  small  deceits.  Tear  this 
book  up !  Tear  it  up,  now !  But  now  I  am  pretending 
to  be  making  notes  on  a  book  I  have  already  read  and 
despise. .  . . 

=  245  = 


Journal   1922 

What  dreadful,  awful  rot! 

I  should  like  to  write  the  canary  story  to-morrow. 
So  many  ideas  come  and  go.  If  there  is  time  I  shall 
write  them  all.  If  this  uninterrupted  time  continues. 
The  story  about  this  hotel  would  be  wonderful  if  I 
could  do  it.1 

If  there  is  a  book  to  be  read,  no  matter  how  bad  that, 
book  is,  I  read  it.  I  will  read  it.  Was  it  always  so  with 
me?  I  don't  remember.  Looking  back,  I  imagine  I 
was  always  writing.  Twaddle  it  was,  too.  But  better 
far  write  twaddle  or  anything,  anything,  than  nothing 
at  all. 

[At  the  end  of  August  1922  K.M.  returned  to  London.] 

My  first  conversation  with  O.  took  place  on  August 
30,  1922. 

On  that  occasion  I  began  by  telling  him  how  dis- 
satisfied I  was  with  the  idea  that  Life  must  be  a  lesser 
thing  than  we  were  capable  of  imagining  it  to  be.  I  had 
the  feeling  that  the  same  thing  happened  to  nearly 
everybody  whom  I  knew  and  whom  I  did  not  know. 
No  sooner  was  their  youth,  with  the  little  force  and 
impetus  characteristic  of  youth,  done,  than  they 
stopped  growing.  At  the  very  moment  that  one  felt 
that  now  was  the  time  to  gather  oneself  together,  to 
use  one's  whole  strength,  to  take  control,  to  be  an 
adult,  in  fact,  they  seemed  content  to  swop  the  darling 
wish  of  their  hearts  for  innumerable  little  wishes.  Or 

1  Fat/ier  and  the  Girls:  see  "  The  Doves'  Nest,"  which  contains  also 
The  Canary. 

=   246   = 


London 

the  image  that  suggested  itself  to  me  was  that  of  a 
river  flowing  away  in  countless  little  trickles  over  a 
dark  swamp. 

They  deceived  themselves,  of  course.  They  called 
this  trickling  away  —  greater  tolerance  —  wider  inter- 
ests —  a  sense  of  proportion  —  so  that  work  did  not 
rule  out  the  possibility  of  '  life.'  Or  they  called  it  an 
escape  from  all  this  mind-probing  and  self-conscious- 
ness —  a  simpler  and  therefore  a  better  way  of  life. 
But  sooner  or  later,  in  literature  at  any  rate,  there 
sounded  an  undertone  of  deep  regret.  There  was  an 
uneasiness,  a  sense  of  frustration.  One  heard,  one 
thought  one  heard,  the  cry  that  began  to  echo  in  one's 
own  being:  "  I  have  missed  it.  I  have  given  up.  This 
is  not  what  I  want.  If  this  is  all,  then  Life  is  not  worth 
living." 

But  I  know  it  is  not  all.  How  does  one  know  that? 
Let  me  take  the  case  of  K.M.  She  has  led,  ever  since 
she  can  remember,  a  very  typically  false  life.  Yet, 
through  it  all,  there  have  been  moments,  instants, 
gleams,  when  she  has  felt  the  possibility  of  something 
quite  other. 

Love-birds  at  47Z?:  Male  and  female.  Male,  green 
underbody,  wings  mole,  tipped  with  yellow,  broad 
at  base,  gradually  growing  smaller  until  the  head 
feathers,  as  close  as  can  be.  Yellow  faces :  a  touch  of 
pale-blue  on  the  chops  and  on  the  top  of  the  beak.  On 
the  male  exquisite  black  spots,  points  of  jet  under  the 
beak.  Tail  of  male  bird  blue. 

Female  yellow  with  overbody  of  pale  green  in  deli- 
=  247  = 


Journal   IQ22 

cate  pencil  lines.  The  bird  is  yellow,  but  a  green-yel- 
low. Male  bird  burrows  in  its  back,  finds.  .  .  . 

September  30.  "  Do  you  know  what  individuality  is  ?  " 

"  No." 

"  Consciousness  of  will.  To  be  conscious  that  you 
have  a  will  and  can  act." 

Yes,  it  is.  It's  a  glorious  saying. 

October  3.  Arrived  Paris.  Took  rooms  in  Select  Hotel, 
Place  de  la  Sorbonne,  for  ten  francs  a  day  per  person. 
What  feeling?  Very  little.  The  room  is  like  the  room 
where  one  could  work  —  or  so  it  feels.  I  have  been  a 
perfect  torment  to  L.M.  who  is  pale  with  dark  eyes.  I 
suspect  my  reactions  so  much  that  I  hardly  dare  say 
what  I  think  of  the  room  and  so  on.  Do  I  know?  Not 
really.  Not  more  than  she. 

I  have  thought  of  J.  to-day.  We  are  no  longer  to- 
gether. Am  I  in  the  right  way,  though?  No,  not  yet. 
Only  looking  on  —  telling  others.  I  am  not  in  body 
and  soul.  I  feel  a  bit  of  a  sham.  .  .  .  And  so  I  am.  One 
of  the  K.M.'s  is  so  sorry.  But  of  course  she  is.  She  has 
to  die.  Don't  feed  her. 

October.  Important.  When  we  can  begin  to  take  our 
failures  non-seriously,  it  means  we  are  ceasing  to  be 
afraid  of  them.  It  is  of  immense  importance  to  learn 
to  laugh  at  ourselves.  What  Shestov  calls  *  a  touch  of 
easy  familiarity  and  derision  '  has  its  value. 

=  248  = 


Paris 

What  will  happen  to  Anatole  France  and  his  charm- 
ing smile?  Doesn't  it  disguise  a  lack  of  feeling,  like 
M.'s  weariness? 

Life  should  be  like  a  steady,  visible  light. 

What  remains  of  all  those  years  together?  It  is 
difficult  to  say.  If  they  were  so  important,  how 
could  they  have  come  to  nothing.  Who  gave  up  and 
why? 

Haven't  I  been  saying,  all  along,  that  the  fault  lies 
in  trying  to  cure  the  body  and  paying  no  heed  what- 
ever to  the  sick  psyche?  G.  claims  to  do  just  what  I 
have  always  dreamed  might  be  done. 

The  sound  of  a  street  pipe,  hundreds  and  hundreds 
of  years  old. 

October.  The  Luxembourg  Gardens.  A  very  small 
railway  train  came  along,  with  a  wooden  whistle.  First 
it  stopped,  blew  the  whistle,  and  then  moved  slowly 
forward  with  a  wonderfully  expressive  motion  of  the 
right  arm.  People  mattered  not  at  all.  It  went  through 
them,  past  them ;  skirted  them.  Then  down  it  fell,  full 
length.  But  two  gentlemen  picked  it  up,  patted  its  be- 
hind, and  in  a  minute  it  whistled  (rather  longer  than 
usual)  and  started  off  again. . . . 

A  little  bird-like  mother  with  a  baby  in  her  arm, 
and  tugging  at  one  hand  a  minute  little  girl  in  a  coat 
made  out  of  a  pleated  skirt,  and  a  pink  bow — it 
looked  like  pink  flannel  —  on  her  clubbed  hair.  A 
very  rich  child  in  a  white  beaver  hat  passed  and  fell 
quite  in  love  with  the  pink  flannel  bow.  When  its  nurse 

=  249  = 


Journal   IQ22 

was  not  looking  it  hung  back  and  walked  beside  its 
little  poor  sister,  looking  at  her  wonderingly  and  very 
carefully  keeping  step. 

A  little  person  in  a  pink  hat  passed,  very  carefully 
dragging  a  minute  doll's  pram.  It  was  so  minute  she 
had  to  drag  it  on  a  thread  of  cotton.  Naturally,  once 
she  stopped  looking  and  her  hand  gave  a  jerk,  down 
fell  the  pram.  For  about  two  minutes  she  dragged  it 
along  on  its  side.  Then  she  discovered  the  accident, 
rushed  back,  set  it  up,  and  looked  round  very  angrily 
in  all  directions :  certain  some  enemy  had  knocked  it 
over  on  purpose.  Her  little  dark  direct  gaze  was  quite 
frightening.  Did  she  see  some  one? 

And  then  suddenly  the  wind  lifts,  and  all  the  leaves, 
leaves  fly  forward  so  gladly,  so  eagerly,  as  if  they  were 
thankful  it  is  not  their  turn  yet  to  .  .  . 

October  15.  Nietzsche's  Birthday.  Sat  in  the  Luxem- 
bourg Gardens.  Cold,  wretchedly  unhappy.  Horrid 
people  at  lunch,  everything  horrid,  from  anfang  bis 
zum  ende. 

October  17.  Laublatter.  The  Four  Fountains.  The 
Red  Tobacco  Plant.  English  dog.  The  funeral  proces- 
sion. Actions  and  Reactions.  The  silky  husks,  like  the 
inside  of  the  paw  of  a  cat.  *  Darling.' 

Fire  is  sunlight  and  returns  to  the  sun  again  in  an 
unending  cycle. . . .  G.  looks  exactly  like  a  desert  chief. 
I  kept  thinking  of  Doughty's  "  Arabia  "... 

To  be  wildly  enthusiastic,  or  deadly  serious  —  both 

=  250  = 


Indiff erence 

are  wrong.  Both  pass.  One  must  keep  ever  present  a 
sense  of  humour.  It  depends  entirely  on  yourself  how 
much  you  see  or  hear  or  understand.  But  the  sense  of 
humour  I  have  found  of  use  in  every  single  occasion 
of  my  life.  Now  perhaps  you  understand  what  the 
word  '  indifferent '  means.  It  is  to  learn  not  to  mind, 
and  not  to  show  your  mind. 

October  18.  In  the  autumn  garden  leaves  falling.  Little 
footfalls,  like  gentle  whispering.  They  fly,  spin,  twirl, 
shake. 

[The  following  entry  was  torn  out  of  her  journal  to  be  sent 
to  me.  But  K.M.  changed  her  mind.  I  found  it  among  her  papers 
with  this  superscription,  "  These  pages  from  my  journal.  Don't 
let  them  distress  you.  The  story  has  a  happy  ending,  really  and 
truly."] 

October  10.  I  have  been  thinking  this  morning  until 
it  seems  I  may  get  things  straightened  out  if  I  try  to 
write  . . .  where  I  am. 

Ever  since  I  came  to  Paris  I  have  been  as  ill  as  ever. 
In  fact,  yesterday  I  thought  I  was  dying.  It  is  not 
imagination.  My  heart  is  so  exhausted  and  so  tied  up 
that  I  can  only  walk  to  the  taxi  and  back.  I  get  up  at 
midi  and  go  to  bed  at  5.30. 1  try  to  '  work '  by  fits  and 
starts,  but  the  time  has  gone  by.  I  cannot  work.  Ever 
since  April  I  have  done  practically  nothing.  But  why? 
Because,  although  M.'s  treatment  improved  my  blood 
and  made  me  look  well  and  did  have  a  good  effect  on 

=  251  = 


Journal   IQ22 

my  lungs,  it  made  my  heart  not  a  snap  better,  and  I 
only  won  that  improvement  by  living  the  life  of  a 
corpse  in  the  Victoria  Palace  Hotel. 

My  spirit  is  nearly  dead.  My  spring  of  life  is  so 
starved  that  it's  just  not  dry.  Nearly  all  my  improved 
health  is  pretence  —  acting.  What  does  it  amount  to? 
Can  I  walk?  Only  creep.  Can  I  do  anything  with  my 
hands  or  body?  Nothing  at  all.  I  am  an  absolutely 
helpless  invalid.  What  is  my  life?  It  is  the  existence  of 
a  parasite.  And  five  years  have  passed  now,  and  I  am 
in  straighter  bonds  than  ever. 

Ah,  I  feel  a  little  calmer  already  to  be  writing. 
Thank  God  for  writing!  I  am  so  terrified  of  what  I 
am  going  to  do.  All  the  voices  out  of  the  '  Past '  say 
"  Don't  do  it."  J.  says  "  M.  is  a  scientist.  He  does  his 
part.  It's  up  to  you  to  do  yours."  But  that  is  no  good 
at  all.  I  can  no  more  cure  my  psyche  than  my  body. 
Less  it  seems  to  me.  Isn't  J.  himself,  perfectly  fresh 
and  well,  utterly  depressed  by  boils  on  his  neck?  Think 
of  five  years'  imprisonment.  Someone  has  got  to  help 
me  to  get  out.  If  that  is  a  confession  of  weakness  — 
it  is.  But  it's  only  lack  of  imagination  that  calls  it  so. 
And  who  is  going  to  help  me  ?  Remember  Switzerland : 
"I  am  helpless."  Of  course,  he  is.  One  prisoner  cannot 
help  another.  Do  I  believe  in  medicine  alone?  No, 
never.  In  science  alone?  No,  never.  It  seems  to  me 
childish  and  ridiculous  to  suppose  one  can  be  cured 
like  a  cow  if  one  is  not  a  cow.  And  here,  all  these  years, 
I  have  been  looking  for  someone  who  agreed  with  me. 

=  252  = 


The  Final  Step 


I  have  heard  of  G.  who  seems  not  only  to  agree  but  to 
know  infinitely  more  about  it.  Why  hesitate  ? 

Fear.  Fear  of  what?  Doesn't  it  come  down  to  fear 
of  losing  J.  ?  I  believe  it  does.  But,  good  Heavens !  Face 
things.  What  have  you  of  him  now?  What  is  your  re- 
lationship ?  He  talks  to  you  —  sometimes  —  and  then 
goes  off.  He  thinks  of  you  tenderly.  He  dreams  of  a 
life  with  you  some  day  when  the  miracle  has  hap- 
pened. You  are  important  to  him  as  a  dream.  Not  as  a 
living  reality.  For  you  are  not  one.  What  do  you 
share?  Almost  nothing.  Yet  there  is  a  deep,  sweet, 
tender  flooding  of  feeling  in  my  heart  which  is  love  for 
him  and  longing  for  him.  But  what  is  the  good  of  it  as 
things  stand  ?  Life  together,  with  me  ill,  is  simply  tor- 
ture with  happy  moments.  But  it's  not  life.  .  .  .  You 
do  know  that  J.  and  you  are  only  a  kind  of  dream  of 
what  might  be.  And  that  might-be  never,  never  can  be 
true  unless  you  are  well.  And  you  won't  get  well  by 
*  imagining  '  or  '  waiting '  or  trying  to  bring  off  that 
miracle  yourself. 

Therefore  if  the  Grand  Lama  of  Thibet  promised  to 
help  you — how  can  you  hesitate?  Risk!  Risk  any- 
thing! Care  no  more  for  the  opinions  of  others,  for 
those  voices.  Do  the  hardest  thing  on  earth  for  you. 
Act  for  yourself.  Face  the  truth. 

True,  Tchehov  didn't.  Yes,  but  Tchehov  died.  And 
let  us  be  honest.  How  much  do  we  know  of  Tchehov 
from  his  letters?  Was  that  all?  Of  course  not.  Don't 
you  suppose  he  had  a  whole  longing  life  of  which  there 


=  253  = 


Journal  IQ22 


is  hardly  a  word?  Then  read  the  final  letters.  He  has 
given  up  hope.  If  you  de-sentimentalize  those  final 
letters  they  are  terrible.  There  is  no  more  Tchehov. 
Illness  has  swallowed  him. 

But  perhaps  to  people  who  are  not  ill,  all  this  is  non- 
sense. They  have  never  travelled  this  road.  How  can 
they  see  where  I  am?  All  the  more  reason  to  go  boldly 
forward  alone.  Life  is  not  simple.  In  spite  of  all  we 
say  about  the  mystery  of  Life,  when  we  get  down  to  it 
we  want  to  treat  it  as  though  it  were  a  child's  tale.  .  .  . 

Now,  Katherine,  what  do  you  mean  by  health  ?  And 
what  do  you  want  it  for  ? 

Answer :  By  health  I  mean  the  power  to  live  a  full, 
adult,  living,  breathing  life  in  close  contact  with  what 
I  love  —  the  earth  and  the  wonders  thereof  —  the  sea 
—  the  sun.  All  that  we  mean  when  we  speak  of  the  ex- 
ternal world.  I  want  to  enter  into  it,  to  be  part  of  it, 
to  live  in  it,  to  learn  from  it,  to  lose  all  that  is  super- 
ficial and  acquired  in  me  and  to  become  a  conscious 
direct  human  being.  I  want,  by  understanding  myself, 
to  understand  others.  I  want  to  be  all  that  I  am  capa- 
ble of  becoming  so  that  I  may  be  (and  here  I  have 
stopped  and  waited  and  waited  and  it's  no  good  — 
there's  only  one  phrase  that  will  do)  a  child  of  the  sun. 
About  helping  others,  about  carrying  a  light  and  so 
on,  it  seems  false  to  say  a  single  word.  Let  it  be  at  that. 
A  child  of  the  sun. 

Then  I  want  to  work.  At  what?  I  want  so  to  live 
that  I  work  with  my  hands  and  my  feeling  and  my 
brain.  I  want  a  garden,  a  small  house,  grass,  animals, 

=  254  = 


All  is   Well 


books,  pictures,  music.  And  out  of  this,  the  expression 
of  this,  I  want  to  be  writing.  (Though  I  may  write 
about  cabmen.  That's  no  matter.) 

But  warm,  eager,  living  life  —  to  be  rooted  in  life  — 
to  learn,  to  desire  to  know,  to  feel,  to  think,  to  act. 
That  is  what  I  want.  And  nothing  less.  That  is  what 
I  must  try  for. 


I  wrote  this  for  myself.  I  shall  now  risk  sending  it 
to  J.  He  may  do  with  it  what  he  likes.  He  must  see  how 
much  I  love  him. 

And  when  I  say  i  I  fear '  —  don't  let  it  disturb  you, 
dearest  heart.  We  all  fear  when  we  are  in  waiting- 
rooms.  Yet  we  must  pass  beyond  them,  and  if  the 
other  can  keep  calm,  it  is  all  the  help  we  can  give  each 
other. . . . 

And  this  all  sounds  very  strenuous  and  serious. 
But  now  that  I  have  wrestled  with  it,  it's  no  longer  so. 
I  feel  happy  —  deep  down.  All  is  well. 

[With  those  words  Katherine  Mansfield's  Journal  comes  to  a 
fitting  close.  Thenceforward  the  conviction  that  "  All  was  well  " 
never  left  her.  She  entered  a  kind  of  spiritual  brotherhood  at 
Fontainebleau.  The  object  of  this  brotherhood,  at  least  as  she 
understood  it,  was  to  help  its  members  to  achieve  a  spiritual 
regeneration. 

After  some  three  months,  at  the  beginning  of  1923,  she  invited 
me  to  stay  with  her  for  a  week.  I  arrived  early  in  the  afternoon 
of  January  9.  I  have  never  seen,  nor  shall  I  ever  see,  any  one  so 
beautiful  as  she  was  on  that  day;  it  was  as  though  the  exquisite 

=  255  = 


Journal  IQ22 

perfection  which  was  always  hers  had  taken  possession  of  her 
completely.  To  use  her  own  words,  the  last  grain  of  '  sediment,' 
the  last '  traces  of  earthly  degradation,'  were  departed  for  ever. 
But  she  had  lost  her  life  to  save  it. 

As  she  came  up  the  stairs  to  her  room  at  10  p.m.  she  was 
seized  by  a  fit  of  coughing  which  culminated  in  a  violent 
haemorrhage.  At  10.30  she  was  dead.] 


A  Note  on  the  Type 
in  Which  This  Book  Is  Set 


The  type  in  which  this  book  has  been  set  {on  the 
Linotype)  is  based  on  the  design  of  William  Caslon 
(1692- 1766).  It  is  a  modem  adaptation  rather  than 
an  exact  copy  of  the  original.  Caslon' s  letters  are 
noted  for  their  extreme  legibility. 


SET     UP,     ELECTROTYPED,    PRINTED    AND     BOUND 

BY    THE    PLIMPTON    PRESS,    NORWOOD,    MASS. 

UTOPIAN    LAID    PAPER 

FURNISHED    BY    H.    LINDENMEYR    &    SONS, 

NEW    YORK 


